BERLIN

SFB 6 4 9 E C O N O M I C R I S K

SFB 649 Discussion Paper 2006-023
How Far Are We From The Slippery Slope? The Laffer Curve Revisited
Mathias Trabandt* Harald Uhlig* **
* Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany ** CEPR, Tilburg University and Deutsche Bundesbank
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".
http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de ISSN 1860-5664
SFB 649, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin

How Far Are We From The Slippery Slope? The Laffer Curve Revisited
Mathias Trabandt Humboldt University Berlin
Harald Uhlig Humboldt University Berlin, CEPR, Tilburg University and Deutsche Bundesbank
This Version: April 3, 2006
We would like to thank Alexis Anagnostopoulos and Henning Bohn for helpful comments and discussions. We also thank Silvia Ardagna, Wouter DenHaan, Michael Funke, Jordi Gali, Stefan Homburg, Bas Jacobs, Magnus Jonsson, Omar Licandro, Bernd Lucke, Rick van der Ploeg, Morton Ravn, Assaf Razin, Andrew Scott, Hans-Werner Sinn, Kjetil Storesletten, Silvana Tenreyro, Klaus Wa¨lde as well as seminar participants at Humboldt University Berlin, Hamburg University, 3rd MAPMU conference, 2005 CESifo Area Conference on Public Sector Economics and 2005 European Economic Association conference. Further, we are grateful to David Carey and Josette Rabesona to have obtained their tax rate dataset. This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk" and by the RTN network MAPMU (contract HPRN-CT-2002-00237). Mathias Trabandt thanks the European University Institute in Florence for its hospitality during a research stay where part of this paper was written. This paper has been awarded with the CESifo Prize in Public Economics 2005.
Address: Mathias Trabandt, Humboldt University Berlin, School of Business and Economics, Institute for Economic Policy I, Spandauer Str. 1, 10178 Berlin, Tel. +49-(0)-30-2093 1680, email: trabandt@wiwi.hu-berlin.de
Address: Harald Uhlig, Humboldt University Berlin, School of Business and Economics, Institute for Economic Policy I, Spandauer Str. 1, 10178 Berlin, Tel. +49-(0)-30-2093 5927, email: uhlig@wiwi.hu-berlin.de
1

Abstract The goal of this paper is to examine the shape of the Laffer curve quantitatively in a simple neoclassical growth model calibrated to the US as well as to the EU-15 economy. We show that the US and the EU-15 area are located on the left side of their labor and capital tax Laffer curves, but the EU-15 economy being much closer to the slippery slopes than the US. Our results indicate that since 1975 the EU-15 area has moved considerably closer to the peaks of their Laffer curves. We find that the slope of the Laffer curve in the EU-15 economy is much flatter than in the US which documents a much higher degree of distortions in the EU-15 area. A dynamic scoring analysis shows that more than one half of a labor tax cut and more than four fifth of a capital tax cut are self-financing in the EU-15 economy.
Key words: Laffer curve, US and EU-15 economy
JEL classification: E0, E60, H0
The supply-side economists...have delivered the largest genuinely free lunch I have seen in 25 years in this business, and I believe we would have a better society if we followed their advice.
Robert E. Lucas, Jr. (1990)
1 Introduction
This paper sheds new light on an old debate - the shape of the Laffer curve. In 1974 Arthur B. Laffer noted during a business dinner that "there are always two tax rates that yield the same revenues".1 After being asked, he illustrated the trade off between average tax rates and tax revenues on his restaurant napkin. In the 1980's, the so-called supply-side economists 1see Wanniski (1978).
2

claimed that the US were on the slippery slope side of the Laffer curve and therefore, tax cuts would increase tax revenues. In response to the Reagan tax cuts, however, government tax revenues dropped. Perhaps then, the US was on the left side of the Laffer curve.
Thus, one ought to investigate the left side of the Laffer curve more closely. This is important for two reasons. First, the knowledge of the peak is important: if it is close, one should be careful about raising taxes to avoid the slippery slope side. Second, the slope reminds us of the incentive effects of tax changes. How strong are these effects quantitatively?
The goal of this paper is to examine the shape of the Laffer curve quantitatively in a simple neoclassical growth model. We model each economic area as a closed economy. In the model, the government collects distortionary taxes on labor, capital and consumption and issues debt to finance government consumption, lump-sum transfers and debt repayments.
We calibrate key parameters to the US and to the EU-15 economy. We use three different preference specifications to achieve this goal. An important quantity is the Frisch elasticity of labor. While it is equal to 3 for a CobbDouglas specification of the preferences in our benchmark calibration, it is set to 0.3 for a Greenwood-Hercowith-Huffman specification, while both deliver the same result on a key tax experiment. We also provide a sensitivity analysis as well as an analysis for individual European countries.
We show that there exist steady state Laffer curves for labor taxes as well as capital taxes. This result is robust with respect to variations of preferences of the household. For consumption taxes, however, the existence of a Laffer curve depends on the underlying preferences.
3

According to the predictions of the model both economies - the US and the EU-15 area - are located on the left side of their Laffer curves, but the EU-15 economy being much closer to the slippery slopes than the US.
We examine how the Laffer curves have shifted between 1975 and 2000 for the US and the EU-15 area. We show that the US has moved closer to the peak for labor taxes while it has hardly shifted relative to the peak for capital taxes. By contrast, the EU-15 area has moved considerably closer to the peak for both - labor and capital taxes.
An individual country analysis for the EU-15 area reveals that in terms of labor taxes all individual EU-15 countries are closer to the slippery slopes of their Laffer curves than the US. For capital taxes this conclusion holds also for the majority of countries in the EU-15 area. Finally, the long run slopes of the labor and capital tax Laffer curves are smaller in all individual EU-15 countries compared to the US.
We quantify the dynamic impact of unexpected and announced tax cuts, financed by corresponding cuts in government spending. The results for our baseline calibration are as follows. For US capital taxes, we find that an unexpected permanent 1 % tax cut corresponds to an endogenous cut of government spending of 1.6 % on impact and 0.8 % in the long run. A 5-year-in-advance announced permanent 1 % cut of capital taxes leads to an endogenous increase of government spending of up to 0.4 % during the announcement period and a cut of government expenditures of 0.8 % in the long run. For the EU-15 economy, we obtain the same qualitative results. However, quantitatively, the figures are smaller than in the US. Thus, the slope of the Laffer curve in the EU-15 economy is much flatter than in the
4

US documenting much higher distortions in the EU-15 area. Following Mankiw and Weinzierl (2005), we pursue a dynamic scoring
exercise. That is, we analyze by how much a tax cut is self-financing if we take incentive feedback effects into account. We find that for the US model 19% of a labor tax cut and 47% of a capital tax cut are self-financing in the steady state. In the EU-15 economy 54% of a labor tax cut and 85% of a capital tax cut are self-financing. Hence, the efficiency gains from cutting taxes in the EU-15 area are considerably larger than in the US economy.
Thus, a large fraction of the lunch will typically be paid for by the efficiency gains in the economy due to tax cuts. A tax cut may not deliver a free lunch. But it often delivers a cheap lunch.
The paper is organized as follows. Section two summarizes the existing literature. The model is derived in section three. In section four we discuss the results. Finally, section five concludes.
2 Related Literature
There is a comparably large literature on the effects of fiscal policy on aggregate fluctuations and growth.
One branch of literature investigates the effects of fiscal policy in endogenous growth models. Ireland (1994) shows that there exists a dynamic Laffer curve in an AK model framework. However, using a similar framework, Bruce and Turnovsky (1999) and Novales and Ruiz (2002) find, that an unrealistically high degree of intertemporal substitution is needed to generate the desired result that a tax cut is self financing. Agell and Persson
5

(2001) argue that the assumption of a constant government share on the economy drives the Bruce and Turnovsky result. Once this share is allowed to vary in response to changes in tax rates then there exist dynamic Laffer curves in AK models for empirically plausible elasticities of intertemporal substitutions.
Another branch of literature focuses on the effects of fiscal policy in an exogenous growth context. Baxter and King (1993) were one of the first authors who analyzed the effects fiscal policy a dynamic general equilibrium neoclassical growth model with productive government capital. The authors analyze the effects of temporary and permanent changes of exogenous government purchases. Garcia-Mila, Marcet and Ventura (2001) study the welfare impacts of alternative tax schemes on labor and capital in neoclassical growth model with heterogenous agents. They focus on the redistributional effects of capital tax cuts. However, in their heterogenous agents framework, they show that there exists a static Laffer curve. In contrast to the above papers, our work features a representative agent framework with endogenous government purchases.
Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (1997) show that there exists a Laffer curve in a neoclassical growth model with endogenous labor taxes. However, these authors focus on the effects of endogenous labor and capital taxes and a balanced government budget rule and show that indeterminacy can occur in such a setup. Our paper by contrast features exogenous tax rates which implies that indeterminacy will not occur. Moreover, we concentrate on a rigorous characterization and comparison of the Laffer curve for labor and capital taxes for the US and EU-15 economy.
6

Floden and Linde (2001) examine the effects of government redistribution schemes in the presence of uninsurable idiosyncratic productivity risk in a parameterized model of the US and Sweden. According to their results, for labor taxes the US is located on the left side whereas Sweden is on the slippery slope side of the Laffer curve. Jonsson and Klein (2003) analyze the welfare costs of distortionary taxation in the US and Sweden. They report that Sweden is on the slippery slope side for several tax instruments while the US is on the left side. These papers however do not focus on the Laffer curve as such but rather briefly mention the implications of their models with respect to it. By contrast, this paper provides a clear cut and fully fledged analysis of the shape of the Laffer curve for the US and EU-15 economy.
Prescott (2004a) raised the issue of the incentive effects of taxes by comparing the effects of labor taxes on labor supply for the US and European countries. He finds that Europeans turned to work less than Americans since labor taxes have risen more in European countries. Our work is in line with Prescott's findings. However, for his main result Prescott (2004a) investigates only the labor market relation of his model and based on this he analyzes the implied incentive effects for labor supply due to labor tax changes. The present paper analyzes the incentive effects of changes in labor, capital and consumption taxes in a general equilibrium framework with endogenous government consumption in the light of the Laffer curve.
Finally, Mankiw and Weinzierl (2005) pursue a dynamic scoring exercise in a neoclassical growth model for the US economy. Dynamic scoring accounts for the feedback effect from lower taxes to growth via increased incentives to participate on the markets. They find that in the US half of a capi-
7

tal tax cut is self financing compared to a static scoring exercise. The present paper extends their work in two dimensions. First, we set up a model that has alternative features like i.e., consumption taxes and endogenous government consumption. Second, we calculate the dynamic scoring effect for the EU-15 and compare it to the US.

3 The Model
We use a standard neoclassical growth model, extended with fiscal policy.2 In particular, the government collects distortionary taxes on labor, capital and consumption and issues debt to finance government consumption, lumpsum transfers and debt repayments. We model the US and the EU-15 economy each as a closed economy.3 Time is discrete, t = 0, 1, ..., .

The representative household maximizes the discounted sum of life-time

utility subject to an intertemporal budget constraint and a capital flow equa-

tion.

maxct,nt,kt,xt,bt


E0 t [u(ct, nt) + v(gt)]
t=0

2Following Prescott (2004a) we abstract from a monetary sector. See Leeper and Yun (2005) for an exposition of the fiscal theory of the price level with monetary-fiscal policy interactions and their effects on the Laffer curve.
3This assumption implies that input factor markets for labor and capital are internationally independent. Labor immobility between the US and the EU-15 is a well known fact and a commonly used assumption in the literature. For capital the closed economy assumption can be motivated by either the Feldstein and Horioka (1980) observation
that domestic saving and investment are highly correlated or by interpreting the model in the light of ownership-based taxation instead of source-based taxation. In both cases changes in fiscal policy will have only minor cross border effects. However, for explicit tax policy in open economies see i.e., Mendoza and Tesar (1998) or Kim and Kim (2004) and the references therein.

8

s.t.
(1 + tc)ct + xt + bt = (1 - tn)wtnt + (1 - tk)(dt - )kt-1 +kt-1 + Rtbbt-1 + st + t
kt = (1 - )kt-1 + xt
where ct, nt, kt, xt, bt denote consumption, hours worked, capital, investment and government bonds. The household takes utility providing government consumption gt as given.4 Further, the household receives wages wt, dividends dt and profits t from the firm. Moreover, the household receives interest earnings Rtb and lump-sum transfers st from the government. The household has to pay consumption taxes tc, labor income taxes tn and capital income taxes tk. Note that capital income taxes are levied on dividends net-of-depreciation as in Prescott (2004a) and in line with Mendoza, Tesar and Razin (1994).

The representative firm maximizes its profits subject to a Cobb-Douglas production technology,

maxkt-1,nt yt - dtkt-1 - wtnt

(1)

s.t.

yt = ztkt-1n1t -

(2)

where zt denotes total factor productivity which is defined as zt = tt. We

assume that t follows a stationary stochastic AR(1) process.

4For similar models with valuable government spending see i.e. Christiano and Eichenbaum (1992), Baxter and King (1993), McGrattan (1994), Lansing (1998), Cassou and Lansing (2004) and Klein, Krusell and Rios-Rull (2004).
9

The government faces the following budget constraint,

gt + st + Rtbbt-1 = bt + Tt

(3)

where government tax revenues Tt can be summarized as

Tt = tcct + tnwtnt + tk(dt - )kt-1.

(4)

We assume that lump-sum transfers st as well as the three tax rates on labor, capital and consumption follow exogenous AR(1) processes. To keep things simple, we assume that government consumption is adjusted accordingly to balance the government budget. Thus, we assume that government debt does not deviate from its balanced growth path5 i.e., bt-1 = t¯b, t  0 and therefore the government budget
(3) can be rewritten as

gt = t¯b( - Rtb) + Tt - st.

(5)

3.1 The Equilibrium

In equilibrium the household chooses plans to maximize its utility, the firm

solves its maximization problem and the government sets policies that sat-

isfy its budget constraint. Except for hours worked, interest rates, taxes and

t,

all

other

variables

grow

at

a

constant

rate



=



1 1-

.

In

order

to

obtain

a

stationary solution, we detrend all non-stationary variables by the balanced

5This assumption is similar to Lucas (1990). For models with variable debt and alternative financing forms see i.e., Ludvigson (1996) or Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (1997) and the references therein.

10

growth factor t. The technical appendix A summarizes the equations that describe the stationary equilibrium. For the dynamics, we log-linearize the equations around the balanced growth path and use Uhlig (1999) to solve the model. See the technical appendix B for a description of the system of log-linearized equations.

3.2 Preference Specifications

We consider three different utility functions for the representative agent.

First, we assume a standard Cobb-Douglas utility function, Uc-d(ct, nt) =

(ct (1-nt)1-)1- -1 1-

as

in

Cooley

and

Prescott

(1995),

Chari,

Christiano

and

Kehoe (1995) or Uhlig (2004). We consider this as our favorite preference

specification since it is most widely used in the macroeconomic literature.

Second we analyze the model when a power utility function Upow(ct, nt) =

(

ct t

)1-

1-

-1

-

1 1+

n1t +

is assumed as in Clarida, Gali and Gertler (2002),

Gali (2002), King and Rebelo (1999) or Merz (1995). Finally, we consider

the case of GHH preferences as in Greenwood, Hercowitz and Huffmann

(1988) or Correia, Neves and Rebelo (1995). In this case utility takes the

following form, Ughh(ct, nt)

=

(ct-

t

1 1+

nt1+

1-

)1-

-1 .

Note that we

augment POW and GHH preferences by t to obtain a formulation that is

consistent with balanced growth.

11

3.3 Calibration and Parameterization
We calibrate the model to post-war data of the US and EU-15 economy. For data on tax rates, we use the results of Carey and Rabesona (2002) who recalculate average tax rates on labor, capital and consumption from 1975 to 2000 following the methodology developed by Mendoza, Razin and Tesar (1994).6 In principle, there are five arguments why we use average tax rates instead of marginal tax rates for the calibration of the model. First, we are not aware of a comparable and coherent empirical methodology that could be used to calculate marginal labor, capital and consumption tax rates for the US and 15 European countries for a time span of the last 25 years. By contrast, Mendoza, Razin and Tesar (1994) and Carey and Rabesona (2002) calculate average tax rates for labor, capital and consumption for our countries of interest. Second, if any we probably make an error on side of caution since average tax rates can be seen as as representing a lower bound of statutory marginal tax rates. Third, marginal tax rates differ all across income scales. In order to properly account for this, a heterogenous agent economy is needed. This might be a useful next step but may fog up key issues analyzed in this paper initially. Fourth, statutory marginal tax rates are often different from realized marginal tax rates due to a variety of tax deductions etc. So that potentially, the average tax rates computed and used here may reflect realized marginal tax rates more accurately than statutory marginal tax rates in legal tax codes. Fifth, using average tax rates following 6Carey and Rabesona (2002) also develop a new methodology to calculate average tax rates. We take a conservative stand here and use the part of their work where the average tax rates are based on the original Mendoza, Razin and Tesar (1994) methodology. However, our results do not change much when using their new methodology.
12

the methodology of Mendoza, Razin and Tesar (1994) facilitates comparison to previous studies that also use these tax rates as i.e. Mendoza and Tesar (1998) and many others. Nonetheless, a further analysis taking these points into account in detail is a useful next step on the research agenda.
All other data we use for the calibration comes from the AMECO database of the European Commission. Although our data comes on an annual basis, time is taken to be quarters in our calibration.

3.3.1 US Model

In line with the above data on tax rates we set ¯n = 0.26, ¯k = 0.37 and ¯c = 0.05. Further, we set ¯b such that it matches the average annual debt to

GDP ratio in the data of 61 %. Hence, in our quarterly stationarized model

we

impose



¯b y¯

=

0.61

×

4.

Further,

we

set

s¯

such

that

s¯ y¯

=

0.11

which

cor-

responds to the 'implicit' government transfer to GDP ratio in the data.7 See

figure (1) for plots of the time series we used for the calibration of the above

variables. The exogenous balanced growth factor  is set to 1.0075 which

corresponds to the average annual growth rate of real US GDP of roughly 3

%. In line with Mendoza and Tesar (1998) and King and Rebelo (1999) we set R¯ = 1.015 which implies a 6 % real interest rate per year. Depending

on preferences this implies a discount factor   [0.9915, 0.9926]. Further,

we set the capital share  = 0.36 as in Kydland and Prescott (1982). In

7Since there is no model-consistent data available for government transfers, we calculate 'implicit' government transfers that are consistent with our government budget constraint. From the steady state representation of equation (3) total government expenditures are equal to g¯ + (R¯b - )¯b + s¯. Since data is available for total gov. expenditures, gov. consumption and net interest payments we can easily back out government transfers.

13

line with Stokey and Rebelo (1995) and Mendoza and Tesar (1998) we set

 = 0.015 which implies an annual rate of depreciation of 6 %. Steady state

technology ¯ is normalized to one. Let us turn to the parameterization of

preferences. We set  ,  and  such that the household chooses n¯ = 0.25

in this baseline calibration. This is consistent with McGrattan and Roger-

son (2003) who provide evidence that workers supply on average roughly

40 hours of work per calendar-week.

Our previous choices of steady states and parameter values were moti-

vated by restrictions imposed by the data. However, there are parameters

left in the models that need to be pinned down and that are potentially free.

These parameters are:

,  ,  ,  ,  .

We apply the following discipline in order to pin down these parame-

ters. First, we set  equal to 1 which is in line with i.e., Cooley and Prescott

(1995) and King and Rebelo (1999). This implies a unit elasticity of in-

tertemporal substitution with respect to consumption for C-D preferences

i.e., 1/cUcS

=

-

Uc Ucc

c¯

=

1 1-(1-)

=

1.8

We also impose 1/cUcS

=

1 for

POW and GHH preferences and it turns out that we need to set  = 1 and

 = 0.855. For POW preferences this is in line with Gali (2002) and for

GHH utility this is roughly in line with one of the experiments in Correia,

Neves and Rebelo (1995).

8Empirical estimates of the intertemporal elasticity vary considerably. Hall (1988) estimates it to be close to zero. Recently, Gruber (2006) provides an excellent survey on estimates in the literature. Further, he estimates the intertemporal elasticity to be two. Hence, our choice reflects a combination of both extremes.

14

3.3.2 Frisch Labor Supply Elasticity

In order to discipline our choices for  and  observe that the model with

C-D preferences is already fully parameterized. That is we are already able

to calculate i.e., steady state tax revenues in the C-D case. Note further that

1/ and 1/ are the Frisch elasticities of labor supply9 in the case of POW

and GHH preferences. Hence, these parameters should matter a lot for the

labor supply decision of households and in turn for government tax revenues

if i.e., labor income taxes are changed.

There are two ways to proceed. One is to estimate or calibrate each

parameter specification separately. The different preference specifications,

each with their own specific parameter choices, then deliver potentially rather

different results for the impact of tax changes on tax revenues. In such

a comparison, it is hard to evaluate, how much of the differences are due

to specific features of the preferences, and how much are due to implicit

and possibly unintended variations across preference specifications, due to

the preference-specific parameter choices. A comparison along these lines

provides only limited information, in particular as there is considerable dis-

agreement regarding key parameters in the literature. We return to this issue

when discussing sensitivity to the parameterization, and in particular figure

(3).

We therefore chose to proceed differently. We have chosen a benchmark

calibration for our favorite Cobb Douglas preference specification, and cal-

culated the local marginal impact on total tax revenues from a change in

9In general,

the Frisch elasticity is defined as f

=

dn dw

w n

|U¯c .

Hence,

from our

model we can

derive

f

=

-

Un n¯

- UUcnUnc
Ucc

nn

-1
.

15

labor taxation along the steady state Laffer curve. We have then chosen 

and  to keep this quantity the same for the US economy, i.e. such that

T¯CU-SD ¯n

=

T¯PUOSW ¯n

=

T¯GUHS H ¯n

.

Thus,

the

change

of

government

tax

revenues

after changing the steady state labor income tax is identical across all three

preference specifications at our baseline calibration. We take the resulting

baseline calibration for the POW and GHH preferences seriously, if the re-

sulting parameters are within the range of values suggested in the literature.

Put differently, our procedure allows us to pin down preference parameters

across the three preference specifications within the range suggested in the

literature so that the resulting implications are compatible and comparable.

This has some surprising implications.

The specific value of the Frisch labor supply elasticity is of course of

central importance for the shape of the Laffer curve. Note that in the case

of our favorite C-D preferences, the Frisch elasticity cannot be pinned down

by

a

free

parameter.

It

is

given

by

1-n¯ 1-(1-) n¯ 

and

equals

3

in

our

base-

line calibration. This value is in line with i.e. Kydland and Prescott (1982),

Cooley and Prescott (1995) and Prescott (2004a). Due to our above calibra-

tion discipline that the slopes of the labor tax Laffer curves should be the

same across preferences we need to set  = 1/3. For POW preferences

this value is roughly in line with Rotemberg and Woodford (1997). Thus,

also for POW preferences the Frisch labor supply elasticity is 3. In allowing

for this value for C-D and POW preferences we follow Prescott (2004b).

He surveys the literature and discusses at length that the Frisch labor supply

elasticity should be 3 in macroeconomic models.

However, there is also a large literature that estimates the Frisch labor

16

supply elasticity from micro data. Domeij and Floden (2006) argue that labor supply elasticity estimates are likely to be biased downwards by up to 50 percent. However, the authors survey the existing micro Frisch labor supply elasticity estimates and conclude that many estimates range between 0 and 0.5. Further, Kniesner and Ziliak (2005) estimate a Frisch labor supply elasticity of 0.5, Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan (2000) find an elasticity of 0.8 and Kimball and Shapiro (2003) obtain a Frisch elasticity close to 1. Hence, this literature suggests an elasticity in the range of 0 to 1 instead of a value of 3 as suggested by Prescott (2004b).
As it turns out, our model is not inconsistent with these rather low Frisch labor supply estimates. Indeed, for the GHH preferences we need to set  = 3.879 in order to fulfill our calibration discipline that the slope of the labor tax Laffer curves are equal across preferences. Hence, this implies an elasticity of roughly 0.26 and is well within if not on the lower end of the above micro estimate range. Why then is the Frisch labor supply elasticity for GHH utility so different from POW and C-D utility if the slopes of the labor tax Laffer curves are all the same? The reason is in breaking the connection between income and substitution effects for the GHH specification, and more specifically, the quasi-linearity of GHH preferences with respect to consumption. This implies that the labor supply decision is entirely determined by the real wage. Hence, only the substitution effect (and no income effect) determines the labor supply decision. Since typically, the substitution effect results in a reduced labor supply in response to a labor tax increase, while the income effect delivers an increase, and since the latter is missing in the GHH specification, the Frisch labor elasticitiy is considerably lower.
17

Conversely, an elasticity as high as for C-D and POW would imply much larger reductions in labor supply due to the substitution effect which would imply a flatter slope of the labor tax Laffer curve.
We will pursue a sensitivity analysis in section 4.3 with respect to the parameters ,  ,  ,  ,  in order to evaluate their implications for the shape of the Laffer curve.

3.3.3 EU-15 Model

As an alternative, we calibrate the model to data for the EU-15 economic

area. Appendix A summarizes how we calculate EU-15 tax rates, debt to

GDP and transfer to GDP ratios. For the period from 1975 to 2000 aver-

age tax rates in the EU-15 economy are equal to ¯n = 0.38, ¯k = 0.34

and ¯c = 0.17.10 In our quarterly stationarized model we set ¯b such that



¯b y¯

=

0.53

×

4

which

corresponds

to

the

average

annual

debt

to

GDP

ratio

of 53 % in the data. As for the US we calculate the implicit government

transfers to GDP ratio which is equal to 0.19 in the EU-15 economy. Hence

we

set

s¯ such

that

s¯ y¯

=

0.19.

See

figure

(1)

for

plots

of

the

time

series

we

used for the calibration. The balanced growth factor  is set to 1.0075 which

is consistent with the average annual growth of real GDP in the EU-15 coun-

tries of roughly 3 %. All other parameters are set to the same values as in

the US model. Hence, we do not take a stand on structural differences other

than implied by fiscal policy in the US and EU-15 economies. Note that this

implies that the household may chooses a different amount of hours worked

in the EU-15 model compared to the US model due to differences in fiscal

10Note that due to lack of data Luxembourg is not included in these figures.

18

policy. This corresponds to Prescott (2004a) who argues that differences in hours worked between the US and Europe arise due to changes in labor income taxes. By contrast, Blanchard (2004) as well as Alesina, Glaeser and Sacerdote (2005) argue that changes in preferences rather than different fiscal policies are the driving forces for the observation that hours worked have fallen in Europe compared to the US.
Tables (1) and (2) summarize the calibration and the parameterization of the baseline models. Additionally, table (3) shows further characteristics of our different preference assumptions which will be of particular importance for the dynamics of our models respectively for the slope of the Laffer curve.
4 Results
The following section discusses the results of our models. We concentrate on the following aspects: steady states and steady state Laffer curves, sensitivity analysis, shifts of Laffer curves over time, joint variations of tax rates, individual european country Laffer curves, dynamic effects of tax cuts and a dynamic scoring exercise.
4.1 Steady States
Table (4) compares the government share on GDP of the data and the baseline models. In the data, the government consumption to GDP ratio is 16.5 percent for the US and 21.3 percent for the EU-15 countries. Our baseline
19

models predict 15.2 percent for the US and 20.9 percent for the EU-15.11
Although there is some gap we argue that the models are roughly able to match average government consumption to GDP data.12
The models are also roughly in line with the total government expendi-
tures to GDP ratio for both - the US and the EU-15. The bigger gap occurs
since in our models, total government expenditures are the sum of govern-
ment consumption, transfers and net-interest payments only. We abstract
from additional expenditures as i.e., government investment, government
military investment and subsidies which certainly affect total government
expenditures in the data.
At this point, we want to emphasize the labor supply decisions of the
households. We set  ,  and  in the US model such that the agent chooses
to work n¯us = 0.25. We use the same numbers for these structural parameters as well in the the EU-15 model. It turns out that the household chooses
to work n¯c-d = 0.22, n¯pow = 0.22 and n¯ghh = 0.23 in the EU-15 economy. Thus, higher tax rates and government shares on GDP reduce the incentive
to work and generate lower labor supply. This result corresponds to Prescott
(2004a) who finds that lower labor supply in the EU countries is due to higher tax burdens.13
11One might wonder, why all three models predict the same steady state ratios. The real interest rate is the same across models which implies that the capital to output ratio is the same and due to that all other ratios are the same along our models.
12The match could be improved by allowing for different values for  or R¯. However, we to not take a stand on structural differences other than implied by fiscal policy.
13Prescott (2004a) reports in table 2 actual labor supply of Germany, France, Italy, United Kingdom and USA for the periods from 1970-1974 and 1993-1996. Taking the average over time and over the 4 European countries shows that in these countries labor supply is 14% lower compared to the US. Our models predict that in the EU-15 labor supply is - depending on preferences between 8% and 12% lower than in the US. Taking the average over preferences of our EU-15 models implies that European labor supply is roughly 11% lower than in the US.
20

Table (5) summarizes the tax revenue to GDP ratios for labor, capital and consumption taxes.14 For the US, labor tax revenues are the largest source of revenue followed by capital and consumption taxes. For the EU-15 labor tax revenues also contribute mostly to government revenues. Conversely to the US, consumption tax revenues are the second largest source of revenue in the EU-15 followed by capital tax revenues. Aside from the fact that the models are able to match this structural difference, the quantitative match is acceptable as well.
Finally, table (6) compares the steady state consumption, investment and capital to output ratios of the models with the data. The models understate the consumption and capital to output ratios but overstate the investment to output ratio. More importantly however, the US and EU-15 models are able to capture the relative differences of US and EU-15 data. That is, the models correctly predict that US consumption to GDP is higher than in the EU-15 area. Conversely, the models also predict that the investment and capital to GDP ratios are smaller in the US compared to the EU-15 economy.
We conclude that although the absolute match of the models is not perfect, the models roughly match the relative differences between the US and EU-15. Hence, the following results regarding the absolute numbers of i.e., the peaks of the Laffer curves should be interpreted with caution. Most insightful will be the relative comparisons of the US and the EU-15 economies.
14The methodology of Mendoza, Razin and Tesar (1994) of calculating average tax rates allows to calculate implicit tax revenues to GDP ratios for our three tax rates.
21

4.2 Steady State Laffer Curves
The top panel of figure (2) shows steady state Laffer curves for labor taxes in the US and EU-15 Model. We obtain the Laffer curves by varying the steady state labor tax rate - while holding all other taxes and parameters fixed - and then computing total tax revenues in steady state. In order to facilitate comparison across preferences and models we normalize steady state tax revenues by steady state tax revenues obtained for C-D utility at the baseline tax rate. Three things are noticeable. First, the US and the EU-15 economies are located on the left side of the labor tax Laffer curves for all preferences specifications. Second, the EU-15 economy is much closer to the peak than the US. Third, the slope of the labor tax Laffer curves at the average tax rate is flatter in the EU-15 compared to the US implying much higher distortions in the EU-15 economy.15 Note that as a consequence of our calibration/parameterization discipline of section 3.3 the slope of the US labor tax Laffer curve is locally identical for all preference specifications at the US average labor income tax rate. For the EU-15 labor tax Laffer curve this is not the case since we use the same parameters as in the US model. This implies i.e., different and lower labor supply across preferences in the EU-15 and hence different slopes of the labor tax Laffer curve in the EU-15.
The mid panel of figure (2) draws steady state Laffer curves for capital taxes. Here the results are even more striking. Again, both economies are on the left side of the capital tax Laffer curve but the EU-15 economy is 15Note that there exists a maximum tax rate up to which we can calculate Laffer curves. The government budget constraint in steady state is given by: g¯ = ( - R¯)¯b - s¯ + T¯. If tax rates become very high tax revenues may be smaller than interest and transfer payments and hence, government consumption would be negative.
22

much closer to the peak than the US. Moreover, the slope of the EU-15 capital tax Laffer curve at the average tax rate is almost flat for all three preference specifications. Cutting capital income taxes - even to zero as Chamley (1986) and Lucas (1990) show to be optimal - would imply only marginal losses in tax revenues.
The bottom panel of figure (2) depicts steady state tax revenues dependent on consumption taxes. For C-D preferences there does not exist a steady state Laffer curve for steady state consumption taxes.16 The income and substitution effects cancel exactly which implies that labor supply is unchanged when the consumption tax changes. By contrast, consumption falls but never to zero since it has a positive value in the utility function. In particular, consumption falls with the same rate as the consumption tax rate rises. Since labor supply is unchanged capital is also constant and thus tax revenues from these factors are unchanged. This implies that tax revenues converge to an upper bound for C-D preferences. In case of POW preferences the parameter  determines whether the income or the substitution effect dominates and hence whether there exists a Laffer curve. If  = 1 both effects cancel exactly and no consumption tax Laffer curve occurs. For  < 1 the substitution effect dominates and hence labor supply and capital fall in addition to consumption - a consumption tax Laffer curve arises. In case of  > 1 the income effect dominates and labor supply and capital rise while consumption falls - tax revenues converge to an upper bound again. For GHH preferences, however, there always exists a Laffer curve. The income effect 16Note that i.e., ¯c = 0.5 is a 50 % tax rate. Hence figure (2) depicts consumption taxes on the interval from 0 to 1000 %. We also experimented with a maximum steady state consumption tax rate of 100 000 % but our result that there is no consumption tax Laffer curve for C-D remains.
23

is zero for this utility function and thus labor supply, capital and consumption fall if consumption taxes rise.
However, across preferences we obtain a mixed result with respect to the existence of the consumption tax Laffer curve. If anything, the slope of tax revenues with respect to consumption taxes is steeper in the US than in the EU-15 model - documenting again higher distortions EU-15 area.

4.3 Sensitivity Analysis

The labor supply elasticity plays a key role for the shape of the Laffer curve.

For POW and GHH preferences figure (3) shows the effects of different

Frisch

elasticities

of

labor

supply

(

1 

resp.

1 

)

on

the

shape

of

the

Laffer

curve.17 We choose alternative values for  and  from the literature. I.e.,

Pencavel (1986) estimates  = 6.7, Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan (2000)

choose  = 1.25 and Rotemberg and Woodford (1997) estimate  = 0.47.

We also experiment with  = 3. For each of these alternative values we redo

our calibration exercise of section 3.3 (holding  and  fixed) and then we

vary steady state tax rates as before.

For POW preferences, figure (3) reveals that the shape of the Laffer curve

changes modestly with the Frisch labor supply elasticity. By contrast, for

GHH utility we obtain dramatic changes with possible peaks at almost the

entire tax range.

Nevertheless, a clear picture emerges. The lower  resp.  , the higher

17We noted earlier that for the C-D case the Frisch labor supply elasticity is determined endogenously. In particular is depends not only on the parameters  and  but also on steady state labor supply. Since n¯ changes with different tax rates the Frisch elasticity changes endogenously too. Therefore we cannot pin down the elasticity to one particular value as in the POW and GHH case.

24

is the Frisch elasticity of labor supply and the earlier occurs the peak of the Laffer curve. This result is intuitive. A rise in labor taxes reduces the real after-tax wage. If the household's labor supply is more elastic with respect to the real after-tax wage, it will reduce its labor supply more strongly. Therefore, the marginal increase of tax revenues is smaller with higher labor supply elasticities - the peak occurs earlier.

In addition, we also pursue a sensitivity analysis with respect to , 

and  . Interestingly, steady state tax revenues in the case of C-D and GHH

preferences are invariant with respect to changes in  and  . That is, steady

state labor supply, steady state capital and steady state consumption do not

depend on  and  .18 By contrast, in the case of POW preferences steady

state tax revenues depend on  via the labor supply decision of the house-

hold i.e.,  n¯ c¯

=

(1

-

)

1-¯n 1+¯c

y¯ n¯

.

We choose alternative values for 

from the literature. I.e., House and Shapiro (2004) set  = 5, King and

Rebelo (1999) use  = 3 in their extended model and Lucas (1990) chooses

 = 2. We further experiment with  = 0.2 and  = 0.5. For each of these

alternative values we redo our calibration exercise of section 3.3 (holding 

fixed) and then we vary steady state tax rates as before.

Figure (4) shows that the shape of the Laffer curve for steady state cap-

ital income taxes changes with different values for  in the case of POW

preferences. In particular, the higher  the later occurs the peak of the Laf-

fer curve. This result is intuitive. The higher  the more risk averse is the

18Variations in  or  lead only to variations in  since R¯ is given in our model. However,  has no effect on the steady state of labor, capital and consumption. Nevertheless,  and  are of course important for the dynamics of the models.

25

household. Due to precautionary savings motives, the household reduces its capital holdings less in case of a higher  . Hence, the peak of the Laffer curve occurs later the higher  .
4.4 Shifts of Laffer Curves
The preceding analysis is based on the calibration of the models to the average of taxes, transfers etc. to post-war data. One might wonder, how the Laffer curves have shifted over time during this period. We investigate this by calculating the Laffer curves at different points i.e., for the earliest and latest available observations in our dataset. US data for the year 1975 suggests that we set ¯n = 0.22, ¯k = 0.40, ¯c = 0.06, s¯/y¯ = 0.11 and ¯b/y¯ = 0.48 × 4. Alternatively, for the year 2000 we obtain the following values for the US: ¯n = 0.29, ¯k = 0.38, ¯c = 0.05, s¯/y¯ = 0.11 and ¯b/y¯ = 0.59 × 4. Using these two alternative sets of variables and holding all other parameters fixed, we calculate steady state Laffer curves for labor and capital taxes for the US model.19
For our favorite C-D preferences, the left panel of figure (5) shows that the labor tax Laffer curve has shifted very little and that the US have moved closer to the peak. By contrast, the capital tax Laffer curve has shifted outwards and the US have hardly moved relative to the peak. The outward shift is mostly due to the rise in labor taxes.
Lets turn to the EU-15 economy. According to the data for the year 1975, 19In detail, we use the alternative tax rates and set ¯b and s¯ such that the model matches the debt and transfer to GDP ratio while holding all other parameters fixed as in the baseline calibration. Then, we vary steady state tax rates to calculate the Laffer curves.
26

we set ¯n = 0.34, ¯k = 0.31, ¯c = 0.16, s¯/y¯ = 0.17 and ¯b/y¯ = 0.31 × 4. For the year 2000 the data suggests ¯n = 0.42, ¯k = 0.38, ¯c = 0.21, s¯/y¯ = 0.19 and ¯b/y¯ = 0.62 × 4. The right panel of figure (5) shows the corresponding Laffer curves for the EU-15 area. For labor taxes the EU-15 economy has moved considerably closer to the peak and the slope has flattened. Even more strikingly, in the case of capital taxes the EU-15 economy has moved almost exactly to the top of the Laffer curve. Hence, we conclude that since 1975 the EU-15 area has moved closer to the peaks of their steady state Laffer curves.
4.5 Joint Variations of Steady State Taxes
The previous sections analyzed the effects of variations of single steady state tax rates on steady state tax revenues. Now, we consider joint variations of steady state capital and labor tax rates. We do so by varying ¯k = ¯n jointly holding all other parameters fixed. Then, we calculate steady state tax revenues. Figure (6) shows the resulting Laffer curves for the US and EU-15 Model. Again, the results indicate that the US and EU-15 are located on the left side of the Laffer curve. However, the EU-15 are closer to the slippery slopes.
We also calculate steady state iso-tax revenue curves. That is, we work out the combinations of steady state capital and labor tax rates that yield a given level of government tax revenues. Figure (7) shows the steady state iso-tax revenue curves for the US and EU-15 model. Notice that for steady state labor taxes the EU-15 economy is much closer located to the summit
27

of the "Laffer hill" than the US. Moreover, the figure reveals that the "Laffer hill" of the US model has a steeper slope compared to the EU-15. That is, in order to increase tax revenues from say 90 to 100 tax rates need to change less compared to the EU-15 model.
4.6 Individual European Country Laffer Curves
In the previous sections we have compared steady state Laffer curves of the US and EU-15 economy. The latter, however, consists of individual countries with most probably different fiscal policies. How do steady state Laffer curves look like for individual european countries? We proceed as follows. For each individual country we calculate the average over time of tax rates for consumption, labor and capital. In addition we compute the transfer to GDP ratio as well as the debt to GDP ratio for each country. Then we feed our model with these five variables that characterize country specific fiscal policies. Further, we keep all other parameters unchanged and then calculate steady state Laffer curves for each country.
The top panel of figure (8) plots the distance in terms of tax rates to the peak of the steady state Laffer curves for each european country. In addition, we add the US as well as the EU-15 average. The figure reveals that all european countries are closer to the peaks of their labor tax Laffer curves compared to the US. Interestingly, Sweden appears to be on the slippery slope side of the labor tax Laffer curve.20 For capital taxes the majority of 20Floden and Linde (2001) report a similar finding for labor taxes. Further, Jonsson and Klein (2003) report that Sweden is on the slippery slope side of the Laffer curve for several tax instruments.
28

european countries are closer to the peak of their Laffer curves. Only Spain, Greece, Ireland and Portugal have a larger distance to the peak than the US. However, these countries together have only a relatively small share on total european GDP. For capital taxes the model predicts that the Netherlands, Finland, Belgium, Great Britain, Sweden and Denmark are located on the slippery slope sides of their Laffer curves.
The mid panel depicts the distance to the peak of the individual country Laffer curves in terms of tax revenues expressed in percent of country specific baseline GDP. For labor taxes the figure shows that tax revenues raise only modestly for the majority of european countries if they would move to the peak of their Laffer curve. In all cases the increase in tax revenues is less than for the US. By contrast, for capital taxes Sweden and Denmark could raise much more revenues by moving to the top of their Laffer curve since they are located relatively far on the slippery slope side.
Finally, the lower panel shows the slope of the Laffer curves for a 1 percent increase of steady state labor and capital taxes. We measure the slope as the change of tax revenues in percent of baseline GDP. The slope of the US labor and capital tax Laffer curve is steeper compared to all european countries which documents higher distortions in the EU-15.
The analysis shows that there is considerable country specific variation within Europe with respect to the shape of the Laffer curve. However, the EU-15 average economy captures fairly well the relative differences between the US and Europe. This is especially true for the distance to the peak for labor taxes. Regarding the distance to the peak for capital taxes this applies to the majority of european countries with most economic weight
29

in terms of GDP. Finally, the EU-15 average economy summarizes well that the slope of the labor and capital tax Laffer curves are flatter in all individual european countries compared to the US. Hence, in the following sections we return to a comparison of the US and the average EU-15 economic area.
4.7 Unexpected vs. Announced Tax Cuts
We now turn to the dynamic properties of the models. In principle, the government may chooses to cut taxes either unexpectedly or with a preannouncement period. Figure (9) depicts the responses of tax revenues to unexpected and 5-year-in-advance announced labor and capital tax cuts for the US model.21'22 Appendix B as well as the technical appendix B explain in detail how we obtain these results. The subsequent results focus on the CD utility case. However, the results are robust with respect to our alternative preference specifications. Some interesting results are worth to be pointed out here.
First, an unexpected permanent labor tax cut leads to a fall of tax revenues for low steady state tax rates. However, if steady state tax rates become sufficiently large, tax revenues will increase in response to the tax cut. This is due to the incentive effect. A cut from very high tax levels creates 21We analyze tax cuts that are symmetric. Giannitsarou (2003) shows that supply-side reforms can be asymmetric under adaptive learning. The author shows that if a capital tax cut coincides with a negative technology shock the transition to the new steady state is slower than if the capital tax cut would coincide with a positive technology shock. 22We have chosen a five year pre-announcement horizon here for illustrative purposes. However, it also reflects the maximum length of a legislative period in most modern democracies. On optimal pre-announcement durations of optimal labor and capital tax reforms see Domeij and Klein (2005) and Trabandt (2006).
30

very strong incentives to work. This enlarges the tax base by more than the reduction of the tax rate. Therefore, we observe a Laffer curve effect even for the dynamics.
Second, an unexpected permanent capital tax cut always leads to a drop in tax revenues in the short-run. However, in the long-run we also observe a dynamic Laffer effect dependent on the level of steady state taxes. The short-run drop - irrespective of the level of taxes - occurs since capital is immobile and therefore cannot react immediately.
Third, an announced labor tax cut leads to a decrease of tax revenues in the short-run regardless of the level of steady state labor taxes. This is due to two effects. The announcement of lower future labor taxes induces the household to work less and to accumulate less capital. Thus tax revenues from these two factors decrease. By contrast, consumption rises during the announcement period due to lower investment. The first effect dominates the latter and thus tax revenues fall in the announcement period. It should be mentioned here that House and Shapiro (2004) document a similar effect. However, when policy is put into place, we observe the dynamic Laffer effect as before.
Fourth, an announced capital tax cut leads to an increase of tax revenues during the announcement period followed by the dynamic Laffer effect in the long-run. The announcement of a cut in capital taxes creates an investment boom which in turn induces a rise in labor supply. Thus tax revenues from labor and capital increase. By contrast, consumption decreases in order to accumulate capital. Again, the consumption effect is dominated by the capital/labor effect during the announcement period. In the long-run,
31

however, we observe the Laffer effect dependent on the level of steady state capital taxes.
Fifth, tables (7) and (8) show the evolution of government consumption for the US and EU-15 model for the baseline calibration. I.e., for US capital taxes, we find that an unexpected permanent 1 % tax cut corresponds to an endogenous cut of government spending of 1.61 % on impact and 0.77 % in the long-run. A five-year-in-advance announced permanent 1 % cut of capital taxes leads to an endogenous increase of government spending of up to 0.38 % during the announcement period and a cut of government expenditures of 0.77 % in the long run. For the EU-15 economy, we obtain the same qualitative results. However, quantitatively, the figures for unexpected tax cuts and the long-run values for announced tax cuts are smaller than in the US. Thus, the slope of the Laffer curve in the EU-15 economy is much flatter than in the US which again documents a much higher degree of distortions in the EU-15 area compared to the US.
5 Dynamic Scoring
Our previous results indicate that tax cuts are not fully self-financing in the US and EU-15 area. However, it is interesting to which extend tax cuts are self-financing given the positions of the US and EU-15 on their respective Laffer curves. Following Mankiw and Weinzierl (2005), we perform a static and dynamic scoring exercise for steady state tax revenues in response to i.e., a steady state capital tax cut. Static scoring is obtained from cutting steady state capital taxes while holding capital, hours and consump-
32

tion at their steady state levels. Hence, there is no dynamic feedback effect

from lower taxes to i.e., higher capital accumulation. By contrast, dynamic

scoring allows for the feedback effect from lower taxes to higher capital ac-

cumulation and corresponds to the response of tax revenues in our DSGE

model. Hence,  is the fraction of the static effect that equals the dynamic

effect i.e.,

T¯DSGE ¯k

=



T¯Static ¯k

.

(6)

Then, the degree of self-financing can be calculated as 100(1 - ). We find

for the US model that 19% of a labor tax cut and 47% of a capital tax cut are

self-financing in the steady state.23 In the EU-15 economy 54% of a labor

tax cut and 85% of a capital tax cut are self-financing. Hence, the efficiency

gains from cutting taxes in the EU-15 area are comparably large.

These results are obtained from a steady state analysis and do not take

a transition over time into account. Figure (10) shows the responses of tax

revenues to unexpected and announced labor and capital tax cuts for static

as well as dynamic scoring over time. Again, the plots reveal that the size

of the dynamic feedback effect is considerable. For each point in time we

calculate the proportions of tax cuts that are self-financing. Tables (9) and

(10) summarize our results. It turns out that in the EU-15 area the degree of

23Note that Mankiw and Weinzierl (2005) report for their model that 17% of a labor tax cut and 53% of a capital tax cut is self-financing. Recently, Leeper and Yang (2006) argue that Mankiw and Weinzierl's result that static scoring overestimates the revenue loss hinges on the assumption that lump-sum transfers adjust to balance the government budget. In particular, Leeper and Yang show that a bond-financed tax cut can have adverse effects on growth. Interestingly, they show that when the government consumption to GDP ratio is adjusted to rising debt in response to a labor tax cut then static scoring underestimates the revenue loss as opposed to Mankiw and Weinzierl. By contrast, in our experiments government debt is fixed and the level of government consumption adjusts. We find that static scoring overestimates the revenue loss for labor and capital tax cuts thereby confirming Mankiw and Weinzierl.

33

self-financing is higher compared to the US at every point in time during the transition period.
Also following Mankiw and Weinzierl (2005), we calculate the "Present Value" of the self-financing. To do so, we sum up the discounted changes in the static as well as DSGE tax revenues. As discount factors we use the after-tax real interest rates obtained from the dynamics. Finally, we calculate the self-financing as before using now the previously calculated discounted sums. For the US model we obtain a "Present Value" of self-financing for unexpected labor tax cuts of 19 % and -2.2% for 5year-in-advance announced labor tax cuts.24 For unexpected capital tax cuts the "Present Value" is 37 % and for 5-year-in-advance announced capital tax cuts we obtain a "Present Value" of 48 %. The same exercise yields the following results in the EU-15 model. The "Present Value" of self-financing for unexpected labor tax cuts is 53 % and 18% for 5-year-in-advance announced labor tax cuts. For unexpected capital tax cuts the "Present Value" is 65 % and for 5-year-in-advance announced capital tax cuts we obtain a "Present Value" of 82 %. Our results show that by any measure there is a much higher degree of self-financing possible in the EU-15. This shows again that there are higher distortions in the EU-15 area compared to the US. 24The negative number for 5-year-in-advance announced labor tax cuts is due to the fact that tax revenues fall in the announcement period in the DSGE model but in the static model tax revenues remain constant at zero. Hence, the discounted sum of changes in tax revenues can become larger in absolute value in the DSGE case than in the static model case which produces the negative self-financing number.
34

To sum up: our analysis reveals that there rarely is a free lunch due to tax cuts. However, a large fraction of the lunch will be paid for by the efficiency gains in the economy due to tax cuts. The lunch is not free, but it is cheap.
6 Conclusion
The goal of this paper is to examine the shape of the Laffer curve quantitatively in a simple neoclassical growth model calibrated to the US as well as to the EU-15 economy. We show that there exist robust steady state Laffer curves for labor taxes as well as capital taxes. According to the model the US and the EU-15 area are located on the left side of their Laffer curves. However the EU-15 countries are much closer to the slippery slopes than the US. Our results show that if taxes in the EU-15 area continue to rise as they have done in the past, the peak of the Laffer curve becomes very close. By contrast, tax cuts will boost the incentives to work and invest in the EU15 economy. In addition our results indicate that tax cuts in the EU-15 area are to a much higher degree self-financing compared to the US which again reflects much higher incentive effects from tax cuts in the EU-15 economy compared to the US. We therefore conclude that there rarely is a free lunch due to tax cuts. However, a large fraction of the lunch will be paid for by the efficiency gains in the economy due to tax cuts. The lunch is not free, but it is cheap.
35

References
[1] AGELL, J. and PERSSON, M. (2001): "On the Analytics of the Dynamic Laffer Curve", Journal of Monetary Economics, 48, 397-414.
[2] ALESINA, A. and Glaeser, E. and Sacerdote, B. (2005): "Work and Leisure in the US and Europe: Why so different?", NBER Macroeconomic Annual 2005.
[3] BAXTER, M. and KING, R. G. (1993): "Fiscal Policy in General Equilibrium", American Economic Review, 83(3), 315-334.
[4] BLANCHARD, O. (2004): "The Economic Future of Europe", manuscript.
[5] BRUCE, N. and TURNOVSKY, S. J. (1999): "Budget Balance, Welfare, and the Growth Rate: "Dynamic Scoring of the Long Run Government Budget", Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 31, 162-186.
[6] CAREY, D. and RABESONA, J. (2002): "Tax Ratios on Labour and Capital Income and on Consumption", OECD Economic Studies, No. 35.
[7] CASSOU S. P. and LANSING, K. J. (2004): "Tax Reform With Useful Public Expenditures", forthcoming Journal of Public Economic Theory.
[8] CHARI, V. V. and CHRISTIANO, L. J. and KEHOE, P. J. (1995): "Policy Analysis in Business Cycle Models", in Thomas F. Cooley, ed., Frontiers of Business Cycle Research , Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1995, pp. 357-91.
36

[9] CHARI, V. V. and KEHOE, P. J. and MCGRATTAN, E. R. (2000): "Sticky Price Models of the Business Cycle: Can the Contract Multiplier Solve the Persistence Problem?", Econometrica, Vol. 68, pp. 1151-1180.
[10] CHAMLEY, C. (1986): "Optimal Taxation of Capital Income in General Equilibrium with Infinite Lives", Econometrica, Vol. 54, No. 3.
[11] CHRISTIANO L. J. and EICHENBAUM, M. (1992): "Current RealBusiness-Cycle Theories and Aggregate Labor-Market Fluctuations," American Economic Review, Vol. 82, No. 3, pp 430-50.
[12] CLARIDA, R. and GALI, J. and GERTLER, M. (2002): "A Simple Framework for International Monetary Policy Analysis", Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 49, n 5, 879-904, 2002.
[13] COOLEY, T.F. and PRESCOTT, E.C (1995): "Economic Growth and Business Cycles", in Frontiers of Business Cycle Research (ed. Thomas F. Cooley), Princeton University Press.
[14] CORREIA, I. and NEVES, J.C. and REBELO S. (1995): "Business Cycles in a Small Open Economy", European Economic Review, 39, 1089-1113.
[15] DOMEIJ D. and FLODEN M. (2006): "The labor-supply elasticity and borrowing constraints: Why estimates are biased", Review of Economic Dynamics, 9, 242-262.
[16] Domeij, D. and P. Klein (2005): "Pre-Announced Optimal Tax Reform", Macroeconomic Dynamics, 2005, 9(2), pp. 150-169.
37

[17] FELDSTEIN, M. and HORIOKA, C. (1980): "Domestic Saving and International Capital Flows", The Economic Journal, 90, 314-329.
[18] FLODEN, M. and LINDE, J.(2001): "Idiosyncratic Risk in the United States and Sweden: Is There a Role for Government Insurance?", Review of Economic Dynamics 4, 406-437.
[19] GALI, J. (2002): "New Perspectives on Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle", in Advances in Economic Theory, edited by: M. Dewatripont, L. Hansen, and S. Turnovsky, vol. III, 151-197, Cambridge University Press 2003.
[20] GARCIA-MILA, T. and MARCET, A. and Ventura, E. (2001): "Supply-Side Interventions and Redistribution", manuscript.
[21] GIANNITSAROU, C. (2003): "Supply-Side Reforms and Learning Dynamics", manuscript, forthcomming Journal of Monetary Economics.
[22] GREENWOOD, J. and HERCOWITZ, Z. and HUFFMAN, G. (1988): "Investment, Capacity Utilization, and the Real Business Cycles", American Economic Review, 78, 402-417.
[23] GRUBER, J. (2006): "A Tax-Based Estimate Of The Elasticity Of Intertemporal Substitution", NBER Working Paper, No. 11945.
[24] HALL, R. E. (1988): "Intertemporal Substitution of Consumption", Journal of Political Economy, Vol 96, No. 2, 339-357.
[25] HOUSE, C.L. and SHAPIRO, M.D. (2004): "Phased-In Tax Cuts and Economic Activity", manuscript.
[26] IRELAND, P. N. (1994): "Supply-Side Economics and Endogenous Growth", Journal of Monetary Economics, 33, 559-572.
38

[27] JONSSON, M. and KLEIN, P. (2003): "Tax Distortions in Sweden and the United States", European Economic Review, 47, 711-729.
[28] KIM, J. and KIM, S.H. (2004): "Welfare Effects of Tax Policy in Open Economies: Stabilization and Cooperation", manuscript.
[29] KIMBALL, M.S. and SHAPIRO, M.D. (2003): "Labor Supply: Are the Income and Substitution Effects Both Large or Small?", manuscript.
[30] KING, R. S. and REBELO S.T. (1999): "Resuscitating Real Business Cycles", Handbook of Macroeconomics, edited by J. B. Taylor and M. Woodford, Volume 1B, 9271007. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
[31] KLEIN, P. and KRUSELL, P. and RIOS-RULL, J. V. (2004): "TimeConsistent Public Expenditures", manuscript.
[32] KNIESNER, T. J. and ZILIAK, J. P. (2005): "The Effect of Income Taxation on Consumption and Labor Supply", manuscript.
[33] KYDLAND, F. E. and PRESCOTT E. C. (1982): "Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations" Econometrica, 50 (November): 13451370.
[34] LANSING, K. (1998): "Optimal Fiscal Policy in a Business Cycle Mdoel with Public Capital", The Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol. 31, No 2. (May, 1998), 337-364.
[35] LEEPER, E. M. and YUN, T. (2005): "Monetary-Fiscal Policy Interactions and the Price Level: Background and Beyond", NBER Working Paper, No. 11646.
[36] LEEPER, E. M. and YANG, S-C. S. (2006): "Dynamic Scoring: Alternative Financing Schemes", NBER Working Paper, No. 12103.
39

[37] LUCAS, R. E. JR. (1990): "Supply-Side Economics: An Analytical Review", Oxford Economic Papers, New Series, Vol. 42, No. 2, April 1990, 239-316.
[38] LUDVIGSON, S. (1996): "The Macroeconomic Effects of Government Debt in a Stochastic Growth Model", Journal of Monetary Economics, 38, 1996, 25-45.
[39] MANKIW, G. N. and WEINZIERL, M. (2005): "Dynamic Scoring: Some Lessons from the Neoclassical Growth Model", manuscript.
[40] MCGRATTAN, E. R. (1994): "The macroeconomic effects of distortionary taxation", Journal of Monetary Economics, Volume 33, Issue 3,June 1994, Pages 573-601.
[41] MCGRATTAN, E. R. and ROGERSON R. (2004): "Changes in Hours Worked, 1950-2000", Quarterly Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, July 2004.
[42] MENDOZA, E. G. and RAZIN, A. and TESAR, L. L. (1994): "Effective Tax Rates in Macroeconomics: Cross-Country Estimates of Tax Rates on Factor Incomes and Consumption", Journal of Monetary Economics, December.
[43] MENDOZA, E. G. and TESAR, L. L. (1998): "The International Ramifications of Tax Reforms: Supply-Side Economics in a Global Economy", American Economic Review, 88, 402-417.
[44] MERZ, M. (1995): "Search in the Labor Market and the Real Business Cycle", Journal of Monetary Economics, 36, 269-300.
40

[45] NOVALES, A. and RUIZ, J. (2002): "Dynamic Laffer Curves", Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 27, 181-206.
[46] PENCAVEL, J. (1986): "Labor Supply of Men: A Survey", in Handbook of Labor Economics, edited by O. Ashenfelter and R. Layard, Vol. 1, North-Holland, Amsterdam.
[47] PRESCOTT, E. C. (2004a): "Why do Americans Work so Much More Than Europeans?", Quarterly Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, July 2004.
[48] PRESCOTT, E. C. (2004b): "Nobel Lecture: The Transformation Of Macroeconomic Policy And Research", forthcoming Journal of Political Economy.
[49] ROTEMBERG, J. and WOODFORD, M. (1997): "An OptimizationBased Econometric Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy", NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997, pp. 297-346.
[50] SCHMITT-GROHE, S. and URIBE, M. (1997): "Balanced-Budget Rules, Distortionary Taxes, and Aggregate Instability", Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 105, No. 5, pp. 976-1000.
[51] STOKEY, N. L. and REBELO, S. T. (1995): "Growth Effects of FlatRate Taxes", Journal of Political Economy, 103, 519-550.
[52] TRABANDT, M. (2006): "Optimal Pre-Announced Tax Reforms Under Valuable and Productive Government Spending", manuscript.
[53] UHLIG, H.(1999): "A Toolkit for Analyzing Nonlinear Dynamic Stochastic Models Easily", in Computational Methods for the Study
41

of Dynamic Economies (R. Marimon and A. Scott, Eds), pp. 30-61, Oxford University Press, Oxford. [54] UHLIG, H. (2004): "Do Technology Shocks Lead to a Fall in Total Hours Worked?", Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol. 2, Issue 2-3, April-May 2004. [55] WANNISKI, J. (1978): "Taxes, Revenues, and The Laffer Curve", The Public Interest, 1978.
42

Appendix

A EU-15 Tax Rates and GDP Ratios

In order to obtain EU-15 tax rates and GDP ratios we proceed as follows. I.e., EU-15 consumption tax revenues can be expressed as:

Ec U -15,tcEU -15,t =

jc,tcj,t

j

(7)

where j are the individual EU-15 countries. Rewriting equation (7) yields

the consumption weighted EU-15 consumption tax rate:

Ec U-15,t =

j jc,tcj,t cEU -15,t

=

j

jc,tcj,t j cj,t

.

(8)

The numerator of equation (8) consists of consumption tax revenues of each

individual country j whereas the denominator consists of consumption tax

revenues divided by the consumption tax rate of each individual country j.

Formally,

Ec U-15,t =

j

TjC,tons
TjC,tons

.

j jc,t

(9)

The Carey and Rabesona (2002) dataset contains individual country data

for consumption taxes. Further, the methodology of Mendoza, Razin and

Tesar (1994) allows to calculate implicit individual country consumption

tax revenues so that we can easily calculate the EU-15 consumption tax rate

Ec U-15,t. Likewise, applying the same procedure we calculate EU-15 labor and capital tax rates. Taking averages over time yields the tax rates we report

in table (1).25

25Note that these tax rates are similar to those when calculating EU-15 tax rates from simply taking the arithmetic average of individual country tax rates. I.e., we would obtain ¯n = 0.38, ¯k = 0.35 and ¯c = 0.19.

43

In order to calculate EU-15 GDP ratios we proceed as follows. I.e., the

GDP weighted EU-15 debt to GDP ratio can be written as:

bEU -15,t yEU -15,t

=

j

ybj,t
yj,t j,t

j yj,t

(10)

where bj and yj are individual country government debt and GDP. Likewise, we apply the same procedure for the EU-15 transfer to GDP ratio.26 Taking

averages over time yields the numbers reported in tables (1), (4), (5) and (6).

B An Analytical Characterization of the Slope of the Laffer Curve

In this section we derive an analytical characterization of the slope of the

Laffer curve for unexpected and announced labor and capital tax cuts. We

detrend all variables that are non-stationary by the balanced growth path t

with



=



1 1-

.

Then,

we

log-linearize

the

equations

that

describe

the

equi-

librium. Hat variables denote percentage deviations from steady state i.e., T^t = TtT-¯ T¯ . Breve variables denote absolute deviations from steady state, i.e. tn = tn - ¯n. See the technical appendix for a full representation of the
stationary equilibrium equations as well as the the log-linearized equations.

Without loss of generality we assume all other exogenous processes are at

their steady states i.e., ^t = 0, tc = 0 and s^t = 0 t.

26Note again, that these GDP ratios are close to those when simply taking the arithmetic average. I.e., we would obtain an annual debt to GDP ratio of 55 % and a transfer to GDP ratio of 19 %.

44

B.1 Unexpected Tax Cuts

For unexpected tax cuts, we assume that capital and labor taxes evolve according to: tk = k tk-1 + t and tn = n tn-1 + t. Using the loglinearized system of equations we can solve for the recursive equilibrium law of motion for k^t and T^t following Uhlig (1999). I.e,

k^t = kkk^t-1 + tk + tn T^t = T kk^t-1 + µtk + tn

(11) (12)

After some tedious manipulations, we can express tax revenues T^t as

follows:

T^t = T kkt kk^-1 + +

T k kk
T k kk

t+k 1 - kt+k 1  k - kk
t+n1 - kt+k 1  n - kk

+

µ

-

T k kk

+



-

T k kk

t k 0k
t n 0n (13)

The coefficients in front of 0k and 0n can be interpreted as the slope of the Laffer curve. Suppose we consider permanent tax changes only, i.e. k = n = 1 and no initial deviation of capital i.e., k^-1 = 0. Then, if kk < 1 we obtain:

lim
t

T^t

=

1

T k - kk



+

µ

0k +

1

T k - kk



+



0n

(14)

The coefficients in front of 0k and 0n characterize the slope of the long

run Laffer curve. Since the coefficients of the recursive equilibrium law of

motion are very complicated functions of the model parameters we rely on

numerical evaluations presented in tables (7) and (8) and figure (9).

45

B.2 5-Year-In-Advance Announced Tax Cuts

In order to model announced labor as well as capital tax cuts we replace tn and tk in the log-linearized system of equations by tna20 and tka20. Further, we add the following auxiliary variables to our system of equilibrium

equations. For capital taxes: tka20 = tk-a119, tka19 = tk-a118, ..., tka1 = tk-a10 with tka0 = ka0 tk-a10 + t. For labor taxes: tna20 = tn-a119, tna19 = tn-a118, ..., tna1 = tn-a10 with tna0 = na0 tn-a10 + t. This structure implies that an innovation in say tka0 in period t = 0 is fully observed by the individuals. However, it takes 20 periods (5 years) until tka20 changes in the respective equations of the system of equations. Thus, the innovation in tka0 in period t = 0 can be interpreted as an announcement that 5 years later capital

taxes will be changed. Again, we use Uhlig (1999) to solve for the recursive

equilibrium law of motion. I.e.,

20 20
k^t = kkk^t-1 + itkai + itnai
i=0 i=0
20 20
T^t = T kk^t-1 + µitkai + itnai
i=0 i=0

(15) (16)

After some tedious manipulations and using

20 i=0

itk-aji

=

20 i=0

i

tk-aj0-i

as well as

20 i=0

itn-aji

=

20 i=0

itn-aj0-i,

we

can

express

tax

revenues

T^t

as follows:

T^t = T kkt kk^-1

+

T k kk

t
kj k
j=0

20 i=0

itk-aj0-i

+

20
(µi
i=0

-

T k kk

i)tk-ai0

+

T k kk

t
kj k
j=0

20 i=0

itn-aj0-i

+

20
(i
i=0

-

T k kk

i

)tn-ai0

(17)

with tna0 = na0 tn-a10 + t and tka0 = ka0 tk-a10 + t. Equation
46

(17) characterizes the slope of the Laffer curve for 5-year-in-advance capital

and labor tax cuts. Suppose we consider permanent tax changes only, i.e. ka0 = na0 = 1 and no initial deviation of capital , i.e. k^-1 = 0. Then, if kk < 1 we obtain:

lim
t

T^t

=

T k 1 - kk

20
i +
i=0

20
µi
i=0

0ka0 +

T k 1 - kk

20
i +
i=0

20
i
i=0

0na0 (18)

The coefficients in front of 0ka0 and 0na0 characterize the slope of the

long run Laffer curve. Note that since

20 i=0

i

=

,

20 i=0

µi

=

µ,

20 i=0

i

=

 and

20 i=0

i

=



the

long

run

slope

of

the

Laffer

curve

is

identical

com-

pared to the case of unexpected tax cuts (see equation (14)). Again, since

the coefficients of the recursive equilibrium law of motion are very compli-

cated functions of the model parameters we rely on numerical evaluations

presented in tables (7) and (8) and figure (9).

C Tables and Figures

47

Table 1: Calibration of the baseline models

Variable ¯n ¯k ¯c
s¯/y¯ ¯b/y¯
 R¯

US Model 0.26 0.37 0.05 0.11
0.61×4 1.0075 1.015

EU-15 Model 0.38 0.34 0.17 0.19
0.53×4 1.0075 1.015

Description Labor tax rate Capital tax rate Consumption tax rate Government transfers to GDP ratio Gov. debt to GDP ratio (quarterly) Balanced growth factor (quarterly) Gross real interest rate (quarterly)

Restriction Data Data Data Data Data Data Data

Table 2: Parameterizing the baseline models

Variable ,  



US Model 1.00 0.855
0.333
3.879

EU-15 Model 1.00 0.855
0.333
3.879

Description Det. IES for C-D and POW Det. IES for GHH
Inverse Frisch elasticity POW
Inverse Frisch elasticity GHH

Restriction

1/cUcS = 1

1/cUcS = 1

T¯PUOSW
=¯n
T¯GUHS H
=¯n

T¯CU-SD T¯CU¯-nSD
¯n

 0.321

0.321

Consumption weight in C-D

n¯us = 0.25



4.479

4.479

Weight of labor in POW

n¯us = 0.25



341.79

341.79 Weight of labor in GHH

n¯us = 0.25

¯ 1.00  0.36  0.015

1.00 0.36 0.015

Technology (normalization) Capital share on production Depreciation rate (quarterly)

Data Data

48

Table 3: Implications of preference assumptions.

C-D Preferences

POW Preferences

Theory

Calibration Theory Calibration

US EU-15

US EU-15

GHH Preferences

Theory

Calibration

US EU-15

cc

=

-Uccc¯ Uc

cn,n

=

-Ucnn¯ Uc

nc,c

=

Uncc¯ Un

nn

=

Unnn¯ Un

w

=

-Un Uc  t

 =f

-Un Ucc n¯ (Ucn Unc -Unn Ucc )

1 - (1 - ) 1

1

(1-)(1-) 1-n¯

n¯

(1 - )

0 0

0 0

((1-)+) 1-n¯

n¯

0.333

0.278

(1-) (1-n¯)

c¯

1.579 1.206

1-n¯ 1-(1-) n¯ 

3

3.596


0 0
  n¯ c¯
1 

11 00 00 0.333 0.333 1.579 1.206 33



(1 -

 c¯(1+

) n¯1+

)-1

1 0.973

-



( c¯
n¯1+

-

 1+

)-1

-

(1

-

 c¯(1+

) n¯1+

)-1

-0.705 -0.573 -1 -0.973



+



( c¯
n¯1+

-

 1+

)-1

4.584

4.452

 n¯

1.579 1.206

1 

0.258 0.258

Note: w and f are not needed to determine the dynamics. These characteristics are listed here for completeness. w can be interpreted as the after-tax real wage. f denotes the Frisch labor supply elasticity.

Table 4: Government share on GDP (in %)

Data Model
C-D POW GHH

Government Consumption US EU-15 16.5 21.3
15.2 20.9 15.2 20.9 15.2 20.9

Total Government Expenditures US EU-15 31.7 45.0
28.0 41.5 28.0 41.5 28.0 41.5

Table 5: Sources of government tax revenue as a share of GDP (in %)

Data Model
C-D POW GHH

Labor Tax Rev. US EU-15 14.9 20.5
16.6 24.3 16.6 24.3 16.6 24.3

Capital Tax Rev. US EU-15 8.3 7.5
8.2 7.4 8.2 7.4 8.2 7.4

Consumption Tax Rev. US EU-15 3.6 9.5
3.2 9.8 3.2 9.8 3.2 9.8

Table 6: Consumption, Investment and Capital as a share of GDP (in %)

Data Model
C-D POW GHH

Priv. Consumption US EU-15 67.0 57.9
63.9 57.6 63.9 57.6 63.9 57.6

Total Investment US EU-15 17.8 20.6
20.9 21.5 20.9 21.5 20.9 21.5

Capital US EU-15 260 312
234 240 234 240 234 240

50

Table 7: US Model: dynamic effects of unexpected and 5-year-in-advance announced permanent 1% tax cuts; C-D utility; baseline calibration.

Labor Tax Cut unexpected announced
Capital Tax Cut unexpected announced

t=0
-1.89 -0.34
-0.64 0.07

T^t t = 19 t = 20 t =  t = 0

-1.86 -1.86 -1.84 -1.06 -2.09 -1.84
-0.53 -0.52 -0.42 0.20 -0.60 -0.42

-3.58 -0.50
-1.61 0.10

g^t t = 19 t = 20 t = 
-3.48 -3.48 -3.38 -2.00 -4.39 -3.38
-1.19 -1.17 -0.77 0.38 -1.46 -0.77

Table 8: EU-15 Model: dynamic effects of unexpected and 5-year-in-advance announced permanent 1% tax cuts; C-D utility; baseline calibration.

Labor Tax Cut unexpected announced
Capital Tax Cut unexpected announced

t=0
-0.83 -0.30
-0.39 0.06

T^t t = 19 t = 20 t =  t = 0

-0.76 -0.96
-0.23 0.20

-0.75 -1.15
-0.22 -0.33

-0.69 -0.69
-0.07 -0.07

-1.78 -0.47
-1.06 0.10

g^t t = 19 t = 20 t = 

-1.56 -1.91
-0.59 0.40

-1.55 -2.69
-0.57 -0.87

-1.36 -1.36
-0.15 -0.15

Note: T^t and g^t denote percentage deviations of tax revenues and government consumption from steady state. t counts quarters.

51

Table 9: US Model: Dynamic Scoring for unexpected and 5-year-in-advance announced permanent 1 % tax cuts; C-D utility; baseline calibration.

Labor Tax Cut unexpected announced
Capital Tax Cut unexpected announced

Degree of Self-Financing (in Percent) t = 0 t = 10 t = 20 t = 40 t = 80
17.5 18.2 18.6 19.2 19.6 - - 8.4 14.3 18.5
19.5 28.1 34.0 41.9 45.7 - - 24.6 36.4 44.7

Steady State
19.2 19.2
46.6 46.6

Table 10: EU-15 Model: Dynamic Scoring for unexpected and 5-year-in-advance announced permanent 1 % tax cuts; C-D utility; baseline calibration.

Labor Tax Cut unexpected announced
Capital Tax Cut unexpected announced

Degree of Self-Financing (in Percent) t = 0 t = 10 t = 20 t = 40 t = 80
46.1 49.1 51.2 53.5 55.1 - - 25.4 41.6 52.6
25.0 44.4 57.7 72.9 83.1 - - 37.8 63.6 81.2

Steady State
54.4 54.4
85.1 85.1

Note:

t

counts

quarters.

"Self-Financing"

is

calculated

as

1

-

T^tDSGE T^tStatic

.

52

Percent

In Percent of GDP

In Percent of GDP

23

22

21

20

19

18

17

16

15 14 1975

EU-15 US
1980

80 75 70 65 60 55 50 45 40 35 30 1975

EU-15 US
1980

41 40 39 38 37 36 35 34 33 32 31 1975

1980

Government Consumption

1985

1990

Government Debt

1995

Government Transfers (implicit)

22

EU-15 US

20

In Percent of GDP

18

16

14

12

10

8 2000 1975

1980

45 EU-15
US

40

1985

1990

Average Labor Taxes

1995

35

Percent

30

25

1985

1990

Average Capital Taxes

1995

20 2000 1975

EU-15 US

25

1980
EU-15 US

1985

1990

1995

Average Consumption Taxes

20

Percent

15

10

5

1985

1990

1995

2000 1975

1980

1985

1990

Figure 1: Data used for calibration of the baseline models.

1995

2000 2000 2000

Steady State Tax Revenues (C-D US Average=100)

Steady State Tax Revenues (C-D US Average=100)

Steady State Tax Revenues (C-D US Average=100)

Labor Tax Laffer Curve (US Model)

160 C-D

O

POW

GHH 140

OO

120

100

80 US average 60

40 0
110 100

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 Steady State Labor Tax n
Capital Tax Laffer Curve (US Model)
O O

Steady State Tax Revenues (C-D EU-15 Average=100)

130 120 110 100
90 80 70 60 50 10
110 100

C-D POW GHH

Labor Tax Laffer Curve (EU-15 Model) O

OO

EU-15 average
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 Steady State Labor Tax n
Capital Tax Laffer Curve (EU-15 Model)
O O

Steady State Tax Revenues (C-D EU-15 Average=100)

90 90

80 80

70 70

60 50
0
350 300

C-D POW GHH
0.2
C-D POW GHH

US average
0.4 0.6 Steady State Capital Tax k Consumption Tax (US Model)

0.8

250

200 O

150

100 US average
50 02

46 Steady State Consumption Tax c

8

60

C-D 50 POW
GHH

EU-15 average

10

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 Steady State Capital Tax k

Consumption Tax (EU-15 Model)

Steady State Tax Revenues (C-D EU-15 Average=100)

240 O 220

C-D POW GHH

200

180 O
160

140

120

100

80

60 EU-15 average

40 10 0

2468 Steady State Consumption Tax c

Figure 2: Steady state Laffer curves.

1
1 O
10

Steady State Tax Revenues (US Average=100)

220 200 180 160 140 120 100
80 60 40
0
200 180 160 140 120 100
80 60 40
0

Steady State Tax Revenues (EU-15 Average=100)

POW Utility: Labor Tax Laffer Curve (US Model)

=0.33 =0.47 =1.25 =3 =6.7

O O O

OO

POW Utility: Labor Tax Laffer Curve (EU-15 Model)

160

=0.33

=0.47
140 =1.25 =3
=6.7

O O

120 O

OO 100

US average

80 EU-15 average
60

Steady State Tax Revenues (EU-15 Average=100)

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 Steady State Labor Tax n
GHH Utility: Labor Tax Laffer Curve (US Model)

=0.33 =0.47 =1.25 =3 =6.7

US average

O O

O O

O

40 10
200 O
180
160

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 Steady State Labor Tax n
GHH Utility: Labor Tax Laffer Curve (EU-15 Model)

1

EU-15 average

=0.33 =0.47 =1.25 =3 =6.7

140 O
120
100

O
O O

80

60

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 Steady State Labor Tax n

40 10

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 Steady State Labor Tax n

Figure 3: Sensitivity analysis on  and  .

1

Steady State Tax Revenues (US Average=100)

Steady State Tax Revenues (US Average=100)

160 140 120 100
80 60 40
0

Steady State Tax Revenues (EU-15 Average=100)

POW Utility: Capital Tax Laffer Curve (US Model) O
O O

130
120 O
110
100

POW Utility: Capital Tax Laffer Curve (EU-15 Model) O
O O O

O O

90 80

=0.2 =0.5 =2 =3 =5
0.2

US average
0.4 0.6 Steady State Capital Tax k

0.8

70 60 50 40 10

=0.2 =0.5 =2 =3 =5
0.2

EU-15 average
0.4 0.6 Steady State Capital Tax k

0.8

Figure 4: Sensitivity analysis on  .

1

Steady State Tax Revenues (Year 1975=100)

Steady State Tax Revenues (Year 1975=100)

160 140 120 100
80 60 40
0
120 110 100
90 80 70 60 50 40
0

Steady State Tax Revenues (Year 1975=100)

C-D Utility - Labor Tax Laffer Curve (US Model) O O

1975 2000

120 110

100

C-D Utility - Labor Tax Laffer Curve (EU-15 Model)
1975 O 2000 O

90

80

1975

2000

70

1975

2000

60

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 Steady State Labor Tax n
C-D Utility - Capital Tax Laffer Curve (US Model)
O
O

1
1975 2000

50 0
120 110

100

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 Steady State Labor Tax n
C-D Utility - Capital Tax Laffer Curve (EU-15 Model)

1

1975 2000
O

O

Steady State Tax Revenues (Year 1975=100)

90

80

2000 1975

70

1975

2000

60

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 Steady State Capital Tax k

50 10

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 Steady State Capital Tax k

Figure 5: Shifts of Laffer curves over time. C-D utility.

1

Steady State Tax Revenues (C-D US Benchmark=100) Steady State Tax Revenues (C-D EU-15 Benchmark=100)

160 140 120 100
80 60 40
0

Laffer Curve for Capital and Labor Taxes (US Model)

C-D POW GHH

OO O

Laffer Curve for Capital and Labor Taxes (EU-15 Model)

130

C-D

POW 120 GHH

O

110

OO 100

90

80

k US average
n US average
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 Steady State Capital and Labor Tax (k=n)

70 60 50 10

n EU-15 average
k EU-15 average
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 Steady State Capital and Labor Tax (k=n)

Figure 6: Steady state Laffer curve for capital and labor taxes (¯k = ¯n).

1

Steady State Capital Tax k
110 125 137
Steady State Capital Tax k
100 104 100

104 102 100

90 90 80 80

110 100 90
100 90 80
80

C-D Utility: Steady State Iso-Tax Revenue Curves (US Model)

0.9 n US average
80 90 80

0.8

90 100

110 100

0.7

80 90 100
110

125 140
137

0.6

0.5 0.4 k US av.

0.3

80 90

125

0.2

125

110

0.1

C-D Utility: Steady State Iso-Tax Revenue Curves (EU-15 Model)
0.9 n EU-15 average
0.8
80
0.7 90 80
0.6 0.5 102
0.4 k EU-15 average 0.3
0.2
0.1

102 104
106

90 100

80

90

100

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 Steady State Labor Tax n

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 Steady State Labor Tax n

Figure 7: Steady state iso-tax revenue curves for capital and labor taxes; C-D utility; Baseline calibration with US and EU-15 steady state tax revenues=100.

Distance in Terms of the Labor Tax n

Distance to the Peak of the Labor Tax Laffer Curve (C-D Utility)

0.35 0.3
0.25 0.2
0.15 0.1
0.05 0

US ESP
IRL PRT GBR

EU-15 GER

GRE ITA

FIN FRA
AUT DNK B

NL

-0.05

SWE

-0.1 12

0.25

0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 0.5
Average (Steady State) Labor Tax n

0.55

Distance to the Peak of the Labor Tax Laffer Curve (C-D Utility)

0.6

US
10

ESP
8

IRL PRT
6 GBR

Distance in Terms of Tax Revenues (% of Baseline GDP)

4 2 0
0.25

EU-15 GER

GRE ITA FIN FRA
B DNK AUT

NL

SWE

0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 0.5
Average (Steady State) Labor Taxn

0.55

Slope of the Labor Tax Laffer Curve (C-D Utility)

0.6

0.5

US ESP

0.4 PRT
IRL GBR

0.3

EU-15

GRE ITA

GER

0.2 FIN

FRA

0.1

AUT

B NL

DNK

0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3 0.25

0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 0.5
Average (Steady State) Labor Taxn

SWE
0.55

0.6 0.6

Change of Tax Revenues in % of Baseline GDP

Distance in Terms of Tax Revenues (% of Baseline GDP)

Distance in Terms of the Capital Tax k

Distance to the Peak of the Capital Tax Laffer Curve (C-D Utility)

0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1
0 -0.1

ESP

GRE

IRL PRT

US

ITA GER EU-15
AUT FRA
NL FIN
B

GBR

-0.2

-0.3

SWE

DNK

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
Average (Steady State) Capital Tax k
Distance to the Peak of the Capital Tax Laffer Curve (C-D Utility)
4
DNK
3.5

3
ESP
2.5

SWE

2
1.5 IRL
PRT GRE
1

US

0.5 0
-0.5 0.1

ITA

AUT

GEREU-15 B FIN

FRA NL

GBR

0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
Average (Steady State) Capital Taxk

0.6

Slope of the Capital Tax Laffer Curve (C-D Utility)

0.1 0
-0.1

ESP

US

PRT

GRE IRL ITA GER

AUT

EU-15 FRA

NL FIN

B

GBR

-0.2
-0.3
-0.4 0.1

SWE

DNK

0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
Average (Steady State) Capital Tax k

0.6

Change of Tax Revenues in % of Baseline GDP

Figure 8: Individual european country labor and capital tax Laffer curves (C-D utility, steady state). The upper two panels show the distance to the peak of Laffer curves measured either in tax units or tax revenues in percent of baseline GDP. The lower panel depicts the slope of the Laffer curves measured as the change of tax revenues in percent of baseline GDP in response to a 1 percent steady state tax increase.

Percent Deviations from Steady State

C-D Utility: Tax Revenues After a 1% Cut in Labor Taxes (US Model) 1.5
n=0.26 1 n=0.40
n=0.55 0.5 n=0.65
n=0.70 0
-0.5
-1
-1.5

Percent Deviations from Steady State

C-D Utility: Tax Revenues After a 1% Cut in Labor Taxes (US Model) 1.5
n=0.26 1 n=0.40
n=0.55 0.5 n=0.65
n=0.70 0
-0.5
-1
-1.5
-2

-2 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 Years
C-D Utility: Tax Revenues After a 1% Cut in Capital Taxes (US Model) 0.6
k=0.37 0.4 k=0.50
k=0.60 0.2 k=0.65
k=0.70
0

-2.5 0

5 10 15 20 25 30 Years

C-D Utility: Tax Revenues After a 1% Cut in Capital Taxes (US Model) 0.6
k=0.37
0.4 k=0.50 k=0.60
0.2 k=0.65 k=0.70

0

Percent Deviations from Steady State

Percent Deviations from Steady State

-0.2 -0.2

-0.4 -0.4

-0.6 -0.6

-0.8 0

-0.8 5 10 15 20 25 30 0
Years

5 10 15 20 25 30 Years

Figure 9: US Model: Dynamic effects of unexpected and 5-year-in-advance announced permanent 1 % tax cuts; Different steady state tax rates; C-D utility.

C-D Utility: Tax Revenues After a 1% Cut in Labor Taxes (US Model) 0.5
Static 5yr. ann. Static unexp.
DSGE 5yr. ann. 0 DSGE unexp.

C-D Utility: Tax Revenues After a 1% Cut in Labor Taxes (EU-15 Model) 0.5
Static 5yr. ann. Static unexp.
DSGE 5yr. ann. 0 DSGE unexp.

-0.5 -0.5

Percent Deviations from Steady State

Percent Deviations from Steady State

-1 -1

-1.5 -1.5

-2 -2

Percent Deviations from Steady State

-2.5 0

5 10 15 20 25 30 Years

C-D Utility: Tax Revenues After a 1% Cut in Capital Taxes (US Model)

0.3 0.2 0.1
0 -0.1 -0.2 -0.3 -0.4 -0.5 -0.6 -0.7 -0.8 -0.9
0

Static 5yr. ann. Static unexp. DSGE 5yr. ann. DSGE unexp.
5 10 15 20 25 30 Years

Percent Deviations from Steady State

-2.5 0

5 10 15 20 25 30 Years

C-D Utility: Tax Revenues After a 1% Cut in Capital Taxes (EU-15 Model)

0.3 0.2 0.1
0 -0.1 -0.2 -0.3 -0.4 -0.5 -0.6 -0.7 -0.8 -0.9
0

Static 5yr. ann. Static unexp. DSGE 5yr. ann. DSGE unexp.
5 10 15 20 25 30 Years

Figure 10: Dynamic vs. static effects of unexpected and 5-year-in-advance announced permanent 1 % tax cuts; baseline calibration; C-D utility.

Technical Appendix

A Stationary Equilibrium

We detrend all variables that are non-stationary by the balanced growth path

t with 

=



1 1-

.

I.e., ct

=

c~tt, xt

=

x~tt, yt

=

y~tt, gt

=

g~tt,

st = s~tt, Tt = T~tt, kt-1 = k~t-1t. All stationary variables like taxes,

interest rates, hours worked and the cyclical component of technology t are not detrended. I.e., nt = n~t, t = ~t, Rt = R~t, Rtb = R~tb, tn = ~tn, tk = ~tk, tc = ~tc. The following equations describe the stationary equilib-

rium:

Households labor supply decision:

-

Un~ (t) Uc~(t)t

=

(1

-

)

1 1

- +

~tn ~tc

y~t n~t

Households Euler equation for capital:

Et

Uc~(t + 1) Uc~(t)

1 + ~tc 1 + ~tc+1

R~t+1

=1

Households Euler equation for government bonds:

Et

Uc~(t + 1) Uc~(t)

1 + ~tc 1 + ~tc+1

R~tb+1

=1

Capital accumulation equation:

k~t = (1 - )k~t-1 + x~t

Real return on capital:

R~t

=

(1

-

~tk

)(

y~t k~t-1

-

)

+

1

(19) (20) (21) (22) (23)

Aggregate resource constraint:

c~t + g~t + x~t = y~t

(24)

Firms production function:

y~t = ~tk~t-1n~t1-

Government tax revenues:

T~t

=

~tcc~t

+ (1 - )~tny~t

+

~tk

(

y~t k~t-1

- )k~t-1

Government budget constraint:

g~t = ¯b( - R~tb) + T~t - s~t

Exogenous AR(1) processes:

(25) (26) (27)

{~tc, ~tn, ~tk, s~t, ~t}

(28)

After assigning steady state values for tax rates, technology, transfers and debt, equations (19) to (27) determine the steady state for all other variables.

B Log-linear Equations

Hat variables denote percentage deviations from steady state. I.e., y^t =

yt-y¯ y¯

.

Breve variables denote absolute deviations from steady state, e.g.

tn = tn - ¯n. The following equations determine the log-linear dynamics

of the model:

62

Households labor supply decision:

(1

+

cn,n

+

nn)n^t

=

y^t

-

(cc

+

nc,c)c^t

-

1

1 -

¯n

tn

-

1

1 +

¯c

tc

(29)

Households Euler equation for capital:

Et

R^t+1

-

cc(c^t+1

-

c^t)

-

cn,n(n^t+1

-

n^t)

-

1

1 +

¯c (tc+1

-

tc)

=0

(30)

Households Euler equation for government bonds:

Et

R^tb+1

-

cc(c^t+1

-

c^t)

-

cn,n(n^t+1

-

n^t)

-

1

1 +

¯c (tc+1

-

tc)

=0

(31)

Capital accumulation equation:

k^t = (1 - )k^t-1 + ( - 1 + )x^t

(32)

Real return on capital:

R¯R^t =

R¯ - 1 + (1 - ¯k)

(y^t

-

k^t-1)

-

R¯ - 1 1 - ¯k

tk

Aggregate resource constraint:

(1

-



-

g¯ y¯

)c^t

+

g¯ y¯

g^t

+

x^t

=

y^t

Firms production function:

(33) (34)

y^t = ^t + k^t-1 + (1 - )n^t

(35)

Government tax revenues:

T¯ y¯

T^t

=

(1

-



-

g¯ y¯

)(¯c

c^t

+

tc)

+

(1

-

)tn

+

(¯n(1

-

)

+

¯k)y^t

+



-



 -1+



tk

-



¯k -1+



k^t-1

(36)

63

Government budget constraint:

g¯ y¯

g^t

=

T¯ y¯

T^t

-

¯b y¯

R¯bR^tb

-

s¯ y¯

s^t

Exogenous AR(1) processes:

(37)

{tc, tn, tk, s^t, ^t}

with cc

=

-Ucc Uc

c¯,

cn,n

=

-Ucn Uc

n¯

,

nn

=

Unnn¯ Un

,

nc,c

=

Uncc¯ Un

and



=

(-1+)(1-¯k R¯ -1+(1-¯k )

)

.

Equations (29) to

(37)

plus the

exogenous

shocks de-

termine the dynamics of the model which can be solved with Uhlig (1999).

In order to determine the dynamics of the models, we need the following

15 parameters respectively steady state variables:

cc,

cn,n,

nn,

nc,c,

¯c,

¯n,

¯k,

,

,

,

R¯,

g¯ y¯

,

T¯ y¯

,

¯b y¯

,

s¯ y¯

.27

Some of these 15 parameters are free whereas others are tight down

by the data or the model. Following tables (1) and (2) the data restricts ¯c, ¯n, ¯k, , R¯, , . Table (3) reveals that cc, cn,n, nn, nc,c are func-

tions of other parameters and steady state variables. I.e., for C-D utility we

obtain two new parameters -  and . However, the parameter  must be

used to pin down n¯us = 0.25 for the baseline calibration. It turns out that

for the case of C-D utility only  is a free parameter. Likewise for POW and

GHH,  and  pin down n¯us = 0.25 so that free parameters in these cases are  ,  ,  and  .

Once we know n¯ in our models we can calculate y¯ and hence from equa-

27Note that in equilibrium Rt = Rtb and thus R¯ = R¯b.

64

tions (22), (23), (24), (26) and (27), we can derive

g¯ y¯

=

1

1 + c

y¯b¯(

-

R¯)

+

¯c(1

-

)

+

(1

-

)¯n

+

¯k(

-



 -1+



)

-

s¯ y¯

(38)

and as well as

T¯ y¯

=

y¯b¯(R¯

-

)

+

g¯ y¯

+

s¯ y¯

(39)

which

pin

down

g¯ y¯

and

T¯ y¯

.

However,

our

choice

for

¯b

as

well

as

s¯

is

restricted

by

the

fact

that

for

the

baseline

calibration

¯b y¯

as

well

as

s¯ y¯

must

match

the

data as given in table (1).

To summarize ,  ,  ,  and  are the only free parameters in our

models. However, as outlined in section 3.3 we set ,  and  such that

the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is unity. In addition we set  and



such that

T¯CU-SD ¯n

=

T¯PUOSW ¯n

=

T¯GUHS H ¯n

.

As

a

consequence

of

our

calibra-

tion/parameterization discipline table (3) reveals that cc, cn,n, nn, nc,c

are identical for C-D and POW utility for the US model. Hence, the dy-

namics are locally identical for these models. By contrast, for GHH prefer-

ences only cc = 1 is identical with the other preference specifications and hence the dynamics will not be identical with the other preferences in gen-

eral. However, implied by our calibration/parameterization discipline that

T¯GUHS H ¯n

=

T¯CU-SD ¯n

we know that for labor income tax cuts the dynamics will

be identical with the other preferences.

65

SFB 649 Discussion Paper Series 2006
For a complete list of Discussion Papers published by the SFB 649, please visit http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de.
001 "Calibration Risk for Exotic Options" by Kai Detlefsen and Wolfgang K. Härdle, January 2006.
002 "Calibration Design of Implied Volatility Surfaces" by Kai Detlefsen and Wolfgang K. Härdle, January 2006.
003 "On the Appropriateness of Inappropriate VaR Models" by Wolfgang Härdle, Zdenk Hlávka and Gerhard Stahl, January 2006.
004 "Regional Labor Markets, Network Externalities and Migration: The Case of German Reunification" by Harald Uhlig, January/February 2006.
005 "British Interest Rate Convergence between the US and Europe: A Recursive Cointegration Analysis" by Enzo Weber, January 2006.
006 "A Combined Approach for Segment-Specific Analysis of Market Basket Data" by Yasemin Boztu and Thomas Reutterer, January 2006.
007 "Robust utility maximization in a stochastic factor model" by Daniel Hernández­Hernández and Alexander Schied, January 2006.
008 "Economic Growth of Agglomerations and Geographic Concentration of Industries - Evidence for Germany" by Kurt Geppert, Martin Gornig and Axel Werwatz, January 2006.
009 "Institutions, Bargaining Power and Labor Shares" by Benjamin Bental and Dominique Demougin, January 2006.
010 "Common Functional Principal Components" by Michal Benko, Wolfgang Härdle and Alois Kneip, Jauary 2006.
011 "VAR Modeling for Dynamic Semiparametric Factors of Volatility Strings" by Ralf Brüggemann, Wolfgang Härdle, Julius Mungo and Carsten Trenkler, February 2006.
012 "Bootstrapping Systems Cointegration Tests with a Prior Adjustment for Deterministic Terms" by Carsten Trenkler, February 2006.
013 "Penalties and Optimality in Financial Contracts: Taking Stock" by Michel A. Robe, Eva-Maria Steiger and Pierre-Armand Michel, February 2006.
014 "Core Labour Standards and FDI: Friends or Foes? The Case of Child Labour" by Sebastian Braun, February 2006.
015 "Graphical Data Representation in Bankruptcy Analysis" by Wolfgang Härdle, Rouslan Moro and Dorothea Schäfer, February 2006.
016 "Fiscal Policy Effects in the European Union" by Andreas Thams, February 2006.
017 "Estimation with the Nested Logit Model: Specifications and Software Particularities" by Nadja Silberhorn, Yasemin Boztu and Lutz Hildebrandt, March 2006.
018 "The Bologna Process: How student mobility affects multi-cultural skills and educational quality" by Lydia Mechtenberg and Roland Strausz, March 2006.
019 "Cheap Talk in the Classroom" by Lydia Mechtenberg, March 2006. 020 "Time Dependent Relative Risk Aversion" by Enzo Giacomini, Michael
Handel and Wolfgang Härdle, March 2006. 021 "Finite Sample Properties of Impulse Response Intervals in SVECMs with
Long-Run Identifying Restrictions" by Ralf Brüggemann, March 2006. 022 "Barrier Option Hedging under Constraints: A Viscosity Approach" by
Imen Bentahar and Bruno Bouchard, March 2006.
SFB 649, Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

023 "How Far Are We From The Slippery Slope? The Laffer Curve Revisited" by Mathias Trabandt and Harald Uhlig, April 2006.
SFB 649, Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

