BERLIN

SFB 6 4 9 E C O N O M I C R I S K

SFB 649 Discussion Paper 2006-049
The Influence of Information Costs on
the Integration of Financial Markets: Northern Europe,
1350-1560
Oliver Volckart*
* Institute of Economic History, School of Business and Economics, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".
http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de ISSN 1860-5664
SFB 649, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin

THE INFLUENCE OF INFORMATION COSTS ON THE
INTEGRATION OF FINANCIAL MARKETS:
NORTHERN EUROPE, 1350-15601
Oliver Volckart
Institute of Economic History Humboldt University of Berlin
volckart@wiwi.hu-berlin.de
May 2006
Contents
1. The issue: information costs and market integration................................................................ 2 2. The Data ................................................................................................................................... 5
2.1. Messenger wages ............................................................................................................. 5 2.2. Exchange rates and monetary standards......................................................................... 14 3. Analysing the data.................................................................................................................. 21 4. Conclusion.............................................................................................................................. 27 Appendix .................................................................................................................................... 31 1. Messenger wages from Hamburg...................................................................................... 31 2. Exchange rates and gold-silver ratios ............................................................................... 38 3. Monetary standards ........................................................................................................... 53 4. Prices of rye (Hamburg and Lüneburg) per wispel ........................................................... 61 References .................................................................................................................................. 62
Abstract
In this paper, the influence of information costs on the integration of Northern European financial markets between ca. 1350 and 1560 is explored. The approach is based on splitting information costs into their constitutive components and on measuring one of these, i.e. the costs of transmitting information, which have particular importance for market integration. The analysis has two main results: First, under pre-industrial conditions, when transmitting information was extremely labour intensive and very little capital intensive, transmission costs can be largely identified with labour costs, and were subject to the same influences. Next, the integration of financial markets depended crucially on the level of transmission costs, high costs being strongly and significantly correlated with weak integration, while lower costs favoured convergence.
JEL classification codes: E44, F31, F36, N24. Keywords: Financial markets, integration, information costs, economic history
1 Financial support from Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft under SFB 649 "Economic Risk" is gratefully acknowledged.

1. The issue: information costs and market integration
In the context of New Institutional Economics, one of the most widely used concepts is that of transaction costs. Ronald Coase (1937), who introduced it into economic theory, defined transaction costs as the costs of using the price mechanism of the market. While a standard terminology has still not evolved and many different definitions appear in the literature,2 there is wide agreement that these costs are a source of friction which damages the ability of the market smoothly to provide for the optimal allocation of resources. It follows that the ability of economic actors to engage in exchange, to specialise and to realise gains from productivity advances due to specialisation also depends on the level of transaction costs, which therefore have central importance for the performance of the economy as a whole.
Research in economic history inspired by New Institutional Economics often invokes transaction costs in order to explain the behaviour of economic agents or economic developments. Douglass C. North's (e.g. 1984a; 1984b; 1987; 1992) seminal studies stand for many others. Still, the approach has met with some criticism. Many scholars claim that it is impossible to operationalise the concept of transaction costs and meaningfully to use it in empirical studies. Clemens Wischermann (1993, p. 249; cf. Bonus and Maselli, 1996, p. 1084), for example, asserts that transaction costs can hardly be measured. Proponents of the concept usually counter this criticism in two ways. On the one hand, they claim that for comparative analyses it is sufficient to establish relative levels of transaction costs (Furubotn and Richter, 1991, p. 11). On the other hand, they point to studies where these costs have been measured, either by comparing the costs involved in specific kinds of transactions, or by estimating the size of the economic sector concerned with initiating and handling transactions (e.g. Wallis and North, 1986; Benham and Benham, 1998; the research on measuring transaction costs is surveyed in Wang, 2003).
2 Thus, Yoram Barzel (1997, p. 4) defines transaction costs as "the costs associated with the transfer, capture, and protection of rights". According to Thráinn Eggertsson (1990, p. 14), they "are the costs that arise when individuals exchange owenership rights to economic assets and enforce their exclusive rights. A clear-cut definition of transaction costs does not exist, but neither are the costs of production in the neoclassical model well defined". A still wider definition is provided by Eirik Furubotn and Rudolf Richter (1997, p. 40), who claim that "transaction costs include the costs of resources utilized for the creation, maintenance, use, change, and so on of institutions and organizations .... Transaction costs consist of the costs of defining and measuring resources or claims, plus the costs uf utilizing and enforcing the rights specified".
2

As far as economic history is concerned, there have not been many attempts to measure transaction costs. In particular, few attempts seem to have been made with regard to preindustrial history: the problems posed by the lack and poor quality of the data seemed too forbidding. Using a new approach, the present paper aims at remedying this defect, at least as far as Northern and Central Europe between the middle of the fourteenth and the second half of the sixteenth centuries are concerned. The intention is neither to measure the development of the transaction sector nor to establish how the costs developed which had to be incurred in order to enter into specific transactions. Rather, the approach is to split transaction costs into components that are more manageable and about whose definitions agreement is easier to reach than about the concept as a whole, and to measure at least one of these. Additionally, in order to demonstrate the relevance of this cost component, the effects its development had on markets in late medieval and early modern Europe are estimated.
Where exactly are costs incurred when economic agents use the market to co-ordinate their activities? A good approach is to return to the origin, that is, to the discoverer of transaction costs. Coase (1960, p. 15) pointed out that "[i]n order to carry out a market transaction it is necessary to discover who it is that one wishes to deal with, to inform people that one wishes to deal and on what terms, to conduct negotiations leading up to a bargain, to draw up the contract, to undertake the inspection needed to make sure that the terms of the contract are being observed, and so on". Obviously, in this context information costs take a central place: ex ante, information is needed in order to find a partner and to determine the characteristics of the good or service which is exchanged. Ex post, enforcing a contract against a dishonest partner is costly for many reasons, but without incurring information costs the agents cannot even begin to determine whether one of them has violated the agreement. If the issue is measuring transaction costs, it therefore makes sense to begin with measuring information costs.
Still, information costs, too, can be split into several categories (for the following see Dudley, 1999, pp. 601 f.). For one thing, there are the costs of encoding and decoding information, which are reduced for example when standardised writing systems and languages are introduced. Thus, without actually attempting to measure the costs involved, Ulrich Blum and Leonard Dudley (2003) showed how at the end of the Dark Ages the creation of a standardised alphabet and the spread of standard Latin contributed to economic growth by making it less costly to record contractual clauses. Apart from this, the costs of storing information depend on the price of the medium
3

used for storage. For instance, when cheap paper replaced expensive vellum in the course of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, the costs of storing information fell. Finally, there are the costs of transmitting information. In spatially segmented markets, they do not only influence the chances of discovering what the relevant prices are, but also of finding a partner with whom to do business. Put differently, the costs of transmitting information determine whether economic agents are able to recognise opportunities for arbitrage. It is this cost category that is analysed in the present paper.
Such an analysis would be incomplete if the relevance of the costs of transmitting information for the performance of markets was not examined, too. The above remarks already point to where it seems promising to look. It has long been realised that arbitrage is the driving force behind market integration, which is impeded by transport costs on the one hand, and information costs on the other (Kindleberger, 1989, pp. 67 ff.). Here, the costs of encoding and storing information play a minor role; what counts are the costs of transmitting it. Hence, it seems obvious to examine how their development influenced the integration of markets. Still, markets for which goods? Transport costs and information costs hamper integration, but their relative importance for different commodities differs: transport costs have a relatively stronger influence on the integration of markets for goods with a high weight-value ratio, that is, for heavy, bulky commodities which are typical mass goods. Grain comes to mind. Information costs, on the other hand, are relatively more important where goods with a low weightvalue ratio are concerned: luxuries, for example. Under commodity money conditions as those existing in late medieval and early modern Europe, there is hardly any good whose weight-value ratio is more favourable than that of money, in other words, where transport costs are relatively less and information costs relatively more important for market integration. Consequently, it is the integration of financial markets that is examined below. This is done by employing a new method that allows us to push back the analysis several centuries farther than research has succeded in doing until now: Hitherto, the limit of quantitative analyses of financial markets has been the early eighteenth or at most the late seventeenth century (Neal, 1985; 1987; Schubert, 1988; 1989); with the method used here, it is the fourteenth century. The hypothesis which is tested is that the integration of these markets was driven by the development of information costs, high costs being correlated with weakly integrated markets, whereas low costs favoured convergence.
4

The rest of the article proceeds as follows: In section 2, the data are discussed. Here, it is first explained how the development of information costs was determined for the period between the middle of the fourteenth and the middle of the sixteenth centuries. Most importantly, the principal source on which this paper is based is introduced. Subsequently, it is explained how the data base needed for the analysis of the integration of financial markets was constructed. The following section (3) concerns the analysis of the data. In a final section (4), the results are presented and discussed in their historical context, and the main hypotheses of the paper are summarised.
2. The Data
2.1. Messenger wages
As indicated above, this paper considers only one component of information costs in the late Middle Ages and the early modern period, namely transmission costs. That transmitting information was an important issue was realised by anybody concerned with long distance trade. In the course of their career, merchants who were active on international markets sent and received hundreds of letters each of which contained bits of information ­ in effect vital pieces of the puzzle they needed to put together in order to obtain a picture of what went on abroad. No wonder that they took pride in being better-informed than their competitors. Thus, in 1410 Sievert Veckinghusen, a merchant from Lübeck whose business interests were as far-flung as Livonia, Flanders and Italy, did not only point out to his brother Hildebrand in Bruges that "great profit" could be made by keeping their agent in Venice abreast of events in Flanders, but also that it would be "a great honour" for him "always to receive letters with all runners, like other people do" (Stieda, 1921, p. 37).
Much information may, of course, have been transmitted informally in the late Middle Ages and in the early modern period, but the quotation shows that sending messengers was the usual way of spreading knowledge which was relevant for doing business. Obviously, such messengers could carry several oral messages and more than one letter at a time, so that here the economies of scale usually involved in the transmission of information apply. Still, if a rough and ready outline of how transmission costs developed over time is needed, the wages that messengers received are a useful indicator.
How can we study such wages over extended periods of time? Many late medieval and early modern commercial sources ­ e.g. account books (cf. Nirrnheim, 1895, p. 115) ­
5

mention sums paid to messengers, but usually the data are too isolated to be easily comparable. What we need are sources that contain serialised information about messenger wages over several centuries or at least decades. Fortunately, such sources have been preserved, albeit rarely from a commercial context: most seem to be records kept by political authorities (cf. Braudel, 1949/86, pp. 365 ff.). The present study draws on the account books of the treasury of the city of Hamburg, which contain year-by-year entries of the sums paid to messengers of the council. These sums are used in order to establish how the costs of transmitting information developed. Is this approach feasible? Clearly, to be so two conditions need to be given: First, the messengers must have received wages and not just some kind of expense allowance, as it is sometimes claimed in the literature (Maack, 1935, p. 1; Ahrens, 1962, p. 28). Furthermore, if they were paid wages, these payments must be representative of the wages granted to messengers not only by political authorities such as the council of Hamburg, but also by e.g. merchants or firms. The material used here makes it possible to confirm that both conditions do indeed hold. In order to demonstrate this, it is necessary to introduce the source on which this paper is primarily based in some more detail.
The earliest preserved account books of the city of Hamburg date from 1350. In 1563, the financial administration was reorganised and transferred to a new department (Koppmann, 1894, p. XI). Between these dates, the principles according to which the records were kept did not change, the entries made in the mid-sixteenth century being organised in exactly the same way as those that are 200 years older. In the present context, the section headed "cursoribus" is of principal interest. Here, the scribes of the treasury entered the missions on which the council of Hamburg sent their messengers, first registering the messenger's name or just "uni cursori", "nuntio" or "tabellario", next the destination, and finally a sum of money paid out. The exact date is usually not given. Altogether, c. 6200 missions are recorded in the "cursoribus"-section;3 additionally, there are c. 1500 entries that concern payments ­ apparently perquisites ­ made to some of the foreign messengers who arrived in Hamburg. Unfortunately, the books containing the entries for 1351-1369, 1388 to 1460, and 1501 to 1521 were lost when parts of the old town of Hamburg burned in 1842. Some of the missing material could be reconstructed with the help of notes taken by a historian of the town some years before the fire, but large lacunae remain (Koppmann, 1869, pp. VII f.). What survives is, however, sufficient to give us glimpses at developments during key periods
3 Some very few missions were entered in other sections of the accounts.
6

of late medieval and early modern history: at the aftermath of the Black Death, at the beginning recovery in the second half of the fifteenth century, and at the effects of the "Price Revolution" of the sixteenth century.
Before the method used in this paper to establish the development of information costs is explained, some points of interest should be noted. First, the source shows that the vast majority of couriers travelled on foot. Mounted messengers of Hamburg are explicitly mentioned only six times (Koppmann, 1878, p. 192; 1883, p. 501; 1892, pp. 347, 553; 1894, p. 211). This does not preclude that occasionally the scribes just did not make a note of the means of travel; in fact, it seems likely that the number of mounted messengers was larger. An examination of another section of the civic accounts of Hamburg ­ headed "ad pretium familiae" ­ shows why this is the case. In the "ad pretium"-section, the scribes entered the basic yearly salaries paid to the civil servants of Hamburg (the members of the city's "familia": night watchmen, gatekeepers, officials who supervised the market etc.). Among these civil servants, a number of "famuli equestri" appears, who were usually employed as outriders. When the names in the "cursoribus"-section are compared with those in the "ad pretium"-section, it becomes evident that occasionally, the mounted servants of the city were employed as messengers, too. Taking these cases into account, 42 missions can be identified where it is either certain or very likely that the messenger travelled on horse.
A second point that is shown by a comparison of the "cursoribus"- and "ad pretium familiae"-sections is that there was not a single year when the council of Hamburg restricted themselves to employing members of the familia as messengers. They always sent other persons, too. This can be conclusively determined when names are entered that do not appear among the city's familiares. However, for analytical purposes anonymous missions are here also attributed to such occasional messengers, the assumption being that the scribe of the treasury knew the familia, and would have entered the name if he had known it. While occasional messengers appear in all years, a trend is obvious: Whereas in 1350 practically every servant of the city could be employed as a messenger, regardless of his usual occupation, by 1371 two familiares were recorded as regular "cursores" (Koppmann, 1869, p. 142); they rarely seem to have fulfilled any other tasks. In the fifteenth century, the share of other familiares fell, and by the middle of the sixteenth century, the council hardly ever sent members of the familia other than the two main messengers. At the same time, the share of nonmembers of the familia, who were employed as messengers, grew. Taken together, both
7

developments (i.e. the fall in the share of other familiares and the rise in that of occasional runners) point to an increasing specialisation within the civil service of Hamburg.
Fig. 1: Types of messengers, 1350-1562
100%

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%

1562 1557 1552 1547 1542 1537 1532 1527 1522 1498 1493 1488 1483 1478 1473 1468 1463 1387 1382 1377 1372 1350

Mounted messengers Regular runners Other familiares Occasional runners

Finally, the source shows that the frequency with which the council of Hamburg sent messengers varied enormously. There were periods when traffic was intense, the council sending up to three messengers per week, while at other times only about twenty or thirty messengers were sent per year.
Table 1: Number of missions per year

Period
1350 1370 1371-75 1376-80 1381-85 1386-87 1461-65 1466-70 1471-75 1476-80 1481-85 1486-90

Missions
115 151 136 92 67 60 56 74 45 39 54 47

Period

Missions

1491-95 1496-1500 1522-25 1526-30 1531-35 1536-40 1541-45 1546-50 1551-55 1556-60 1561-62

40 48 38 36 56 62 59 59 44 64 89

8

The cause of these variations is unclear, all the more so as falling numbers of civic messengers do not seem to have been made up by rises in the numbers of foreign envoys who arrived in Hamburg. However, since there must have been more foreign messengers than those who received a payment out of the treasury and who are mentioned in the account books (for some years, e.g. 1527, not even one is recorded), this problem must remain open.
The method used in the present paper in order to establish the development of transmission costs is to determine the geographical co-ordinates of the messengers' destinations, to calculate the distance from Hamburg and then the per-kilometre sum. Starting out from the distance as the crow flies obviously yields sums which are somewhat too high. However, the focus here is not on individual income or purchasing power but on the fluctuations of payments over time, so that this approach is acceptable. Altogether it is possible to determine the direct distance from Hamburg for about 75% of the destinations. In the rest of the cases, the scribe of the treasury did not make a note of the place, but rather of a person or of a larger region where the messenger was sent. Many of the persons were princes of neighbouring territories ­ the counts of Holstein, the dukes of Brunswick-Lüneburg, of Mecklenburg and so on ­, who were fairly mobile and had so many residences that these entries must be neglected. Regions, such as the Alte Land opposite Hamburg on the south bank of the Elbe or Dithmarschen on the west coast of Holstein, present a problem because they are quite large and as destinations altogether too imprecise to allow the calculation of a per-kilometre sum from Hamburg.
The proponents of the hypothesis that civic messengers did not receive per-kilometre wages but rather an expense allowance do not tell, but their view seems to be based on the observation that even within the same year, sums paid for journeys to the same destinations varied widely. In 1350, for example, the messenger Arnold Sasse was twice sent to Bergedorf, a village just 18 kilometres from Hamburg. At one time he received 1s., at the other 4s. (Koppmann, 1869, p. 12).4 In 1470, Johannes Bur got 16s. for his mission to Lübeck (c. 57 kilometres), while Ludekin Meiger was given just 7s. for the same distance (Koppmann, 1873, pp. 445 f.). Even at the end of the period considered
4 The currency in which the accounts were kept is the Pound of Lübeck (£) that was divided into 20 shillings (s.) and 240 pennies (d.). Hamburg was a member of a currency union (the "Wendish Monetary Union") which linked it not only with Lübeck but also with the neighbouring cities of Lüneburg and Wismar. In these cities, the most common unit of account was not the pound but the Mark (m.), which was divided into 16 shillings or 192 pennies (thus, £1 equalled 1m.4s.). In the appendix, nominal wages of messengers are given in the more common unit of account, i.e. in the Mark of Lübeck.
9

here, fixed tariffs that were paid for specific distances did not exist (cf. Gerteis, 1989, p. 22).5 The sums paid to messengers and the distances they went are still quite closely correlated (the mean correlation coefficient is 0.72 for the regular runners, 0.66 for occasional messengers and 0.59 for both mounted servants and other familiares), but such variations might nevertheless support the view that the payments were just supposed to cover expenses incurred by the messengers. However, any number of alternative explanations comes to mind. Thus, with regard to nearby Lüneburg's messenger service Ranft (1987, p. 82) suggested that the kind of mission ­ transmitting verbal information, carrying important documents etc. ­ influenced payments. Just as well, the messenger's age or experience, his speed or why not the weather or the time of the year may have been decisive. Still, there is a way to determine whether the expense-allowance view is correct. Obviously, the hypothesis can apply to civil servants only, that is to persons who received a regular basic salary. Occasional messengers must have received a wage. If the traditional hypothesis was correct, it should be possible to make out a systematic difference between the sums paid to both types of messengers: those who did not belong to the "familia" should have received more because they could not rely on a basic salary. In order to show whether this was indeed the case, it seems useful to treat the wages paid to the two regular runners whom the council employed as a benchmark; this is the only group for which data exist for every year apart from 1350. The wages that occasional runners received can then be compared to those of the council messengers.
5 In 1561, for example, Georg Wolters received £1 for one mission to Lübeck, and £1.10s. for another (Koppmann, 1894, p. 311).
10

Deviation in %

1560 1555 1550 1545 1540 1535 1530 1525 1501 1496 1491 1486 1481 1476 1471 1466 1461 1385 1380 1375 1370

Fig. 2: Deviation of wages of occasional runners from those of regular runners (in percent), 1370-1562
60 50 40 30 20 10
0 -10 -20 -30 -40 -50 -60
While differences could become large, there do not seem to have been systematic deviations into one or the other direction. Perhaps it could be said that conditions favoured the occasional runners in the late 1480s and 1490s, and harmed them in the 1550s, but otherwise years when they were better paid alternated with years when they received less than the two regular runners did. Evidently, this contradicts the hypothesis that familiares received a kind of expense allowance. Members of Hamburg's familia were paid a wage that seems to have been individually negotiated between them and the city's financial administration. At the same time, the lack of a clear direction into which the wages of regular runners deviated from those of occasional messengers suggests that the data found in the account books of Hamburg are indeed representative of messenger wages in general: Merchants probably paid similar per-kilometre sums.
The question of why the wages of regular and occasional runners diverged cannot be answered on the basis of the surviving sources. However, the general development can be explained. While New Institutional Economics suggests that the level of transaction costs ­ and by implication that of the costs of transmitting information ­ is strongly influenced by institutional change, the literature which is concerned with information costs in the narrow sense of the word puts the main stress on the importance of either cultural factors (such as the spread of standardised writing systems or languages) or technology (North, 1987; Blum and Dudley, 2003; Dudley, 1999; cf. Eggertsson, 1990,
11

p. 16). How about the present case? The problem becomes clearer when the wages that messengers received are contrasted with those of other professions. Unfortunately, other wage series from Hamburg are not preserved, so that interregional comparisons are necessary, for example with Antwerp where the wages of craftsmen are well recorded (at least from c. 1430, cf. van der Wee, 1963, pp. 457-62). As long as we do not have sufficient data to put together plausible commodity baskets, such comparisons are best based on the grain equivalents of the sums paid as wages. This can here be done because in the account books of the treasury of Hamburg prices of rye are mentioned relatively often; there are some gaps, but most of these can be filled with data from the account books of the treasury of nearby Lüneburg (StA Lüneburg, AB 56,1.2.).6 Still, as for most years there are not more than one or two observations, and as grain prices were subject to violent seasonal fluctuations, low-frequency data such as those used here can not convey more than a vague impression of the general trend. To increase clarity we will therefore use decennial means, concentrating on the wages of professional messengers, that is, of Hamburg's two regular runners and of the occasional runners which the council employed, and compare those to the wages of masons from Antwerp.
6 Supplementing data from Hamburg with those from Lüneburg is possible because the distance between the cities is barely 44 kilometres. Moreover, Hamburg and Lüneburg were linked by a muchfrequented waterway (via the rivers Elbe and Ilmenau) and had, at the time discussed here, the same currency. They are therefore assumed to have been a fairly well-integrated grain market. For the price of rye in Antwerp see van der Wee (1963, pp. 174-8).
12

l rye/km l rye/day

Fig. 3: Wages of messengers in Hamburg (in litre rye per kilometre) and of masons in Antwerp (in litre rye per day), decennial means 1371-1560

1.6 50
1.4 45 40
1.2 35
1.0 30
0.8 25
0.6 20 15
0.4 10
0.2 5
0.0 0 1371- 1381- 1461- 1471- 1481- 1491- 1521- 1531- 1541- 155180 90 70 80 90 1500 30 40 50 60

Regular runners

Occasional runners

Masons

Despite the considerable differences that can be observed in some decades, the overall

development of messenger wages in Hamburg and masons' wages in Antwerp was

remarkably similar: Comparatively high real wages in the late fourteenth and fifteenth

centuries were followed by much lower wages in the sixteenth century.7 The data

suggest that the factor which had the strongest influence on wages was the supply of

labour which shrank due to the Black Death and to recurring waves of the plague in the

second half of the fourteenth and the early fifteenth centuries, began to grow again in

the second half of the fifteenth century, and outran the supply of grain in the sixteenth

century. The fall of real wages after c. 1460 was, in fact, a common development which

has been observed all over Europe (Braudel and Spooner, 1967, p. 428). By contrast,

institutional change is unlikely to have had a strong effect on both the wages of

messengers in Hamburg and of masons in Antwerp, as it would have had to occur in

both cities at the same time. As for technical change, it is hard to imagine innovations

that affected messengers and masons alike. In sum: the development of transmission

costs seems to have been primarily driven by the labour supply ­ a conclusion which is

all the more plausible as, like all services before industrialisation, transmitting

7 The coefficient for the correlation of the wages of regular runners and masons is 0.49, and for the wages of occasional runners and masons 0.44.
13

information was extremely labour intensive (and very little capital intensive) in the late Middle Ages and the early modern period.
2.2. Exchange rates and monetary standards
As explained above, it is plausible to expect that transmission costs influenced market integration, and that this influence should be most obvious where a commodity with a low weight-value ratio such as money was concerned. Hitherto, there has not been a lot of research on the question of how well integrated pre-modern financial markets were. The approach used in nineteenth- or twentieth-century studies is based on the examination of interest rated demanded by various banks; if rates between several localities were similar ­ if, in other words, the Law of One Price held ­, this is interpreted as indicating a well-integrated market. Given the lack of data, this method cannot be used for the period analysed here. Alternatively, Larry Neal (1985; 1987) examined prices paid at English and Dutch stock markets. In this way, he was able to push the analysis back to the early eighteenth century. Eric S. Schubert (1988), who used exchange rates and fees paid for bills of exchange, managed to extend it into the late seventeenth century. Up to now, nobody has gone further back.
However, there is a simple approach to this issue which suggests itself under a commodity money system such as that which existed in fourteenth- to sixteenth-century Northern Europe. This approach is based on the fact that at this time, merchants tended to treat money just as any other commodity. Thus, in Hanseatic sources the terms used to describe exchange transactions were "buying" and "selling" coins, and the use of bills of exchange was called "overkof", which can be translated as "sale at a distance" (e.g. Mollwo, 1901, pp. 30, 33; Lesnikov, 1973, p. 39). Moreover, in commercial correspondence the partners frequently informed each other about the development of exchange rates abroad (e.g. Stieda, 1921, pp. 83, 94-97). In view of these facts, it would be more than surprising if they had shunned opportunities to profit from arbitrage in money.
During the time examined here, c. 20 different types of gold coins and about 6 major silver currencies were in use between the eastern Baltic and the Netherlands; additionally, there were a number of currencies of local importance. Under conditions like these, how can we use exchange rates in order to analyse the integration of financial markets? We need to relate the weight and fineness of gold coins to their exchange rates in silver currencies, and in order to become internationally comparable, we need to
14

reduce these exchange rates to their content of fine silver. Put briefly, exchange rates of gold coins must be used to determine the gold-silver ratios in Hamburg and in several places with which the city traded. When these ratios are interpreted as prices paid on local financial markets, the approach based on the Law of One Price can be used: Goldsilver ratios which were similar between several localities indicate well-integrated markets, whereas differences between local ratios show that opportunities for arbitrage existed ­ opportunities that were not used due to high transport- and, presumably, prohibitive information costs.
Despite its overall simplicity, the approach sketched above is beset with a host of difficulties. In late medieval and early modern Europe, the way gold coins were handled differed in an important respect from the way silver was used: gold was the most important medium of long distance trade, whereas silver was more often used for local and smaller transactions. Both media were, therefore, only imperfectly substitutable. Still, as accounts were kept in units based on silver coins (such as the mark or the pound), merchants and others who handled sums in gold were used to calculating the exchange rates, and it is from their account books that most of our information about these rates stems. In most cases, the person who kept the account simply translated a sum in gold into another sum in a silver currency. The same applies to many exchange rates found in commercial letters and similar papers. However, how did the authors of such documents arrive at the exchange rates? There were, in fact, several ways (cf. Spufford, 1986, pp. l f.): The most elementary one was based on manual exchange, that is, on the simultaneous and on the spot exchange of coins of one currency for that of another. A more sophisticated kind of exchange made use of bills, which developed during the high Middle Ages. Sometimes, rates based on them are recorded in account books, too. Finally, there were official rates that were determined or imposed by political authorities not only for domestic, but occasionally even for foreign gold. A broad literature exists where such rates, particularly those based on the nominal values of domestic gold coins, are used as a basis for calculating gold-silver ratios (e.g. Watson, 1967; Lane and Mueller, 1985, pp. 324 f.). Harry Miskimin (1985/89, pp. 14851; cf. Luschin von Ebengreuth, 1892, pp. 7 f.) forcefully argued against this approach, claiming that Renaissance princes were seldom able to enforce the circulation of their gold at its nominal par value. Hence, in the present study politically imposed exchange rates are excluded from the start; here, the focus is on market rates only.
15

As for the two other ways exchange rates could develop ­ i.e. manual exchange and bills ­, it is under dispute which was more important at the time considered here. The traditional assumption is that Hanseatic merchants made little use of bills of exchange and were hostile to credit in general (Dollinger, 1964/88, pp. 252 ff.). This view has been challenged by Jenks (1982), and the sources show, in fact, that by the early fifteenth century bills were employed quite frequently in monetary transfers at least between Bruges and Lübeck (Stieda, 1887; 1894; 1921; Lesnikov, 1973). In this context, two points should be noted. On the one hand, exchange rates found in bills may contain a hidden interest rate; hence, there may be a systematic difference between them and the rates paid in manual exchange (cf. de Roover, 1968, pp. 32 ff.). On the other hand, it has sometimes been claimed that already by the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, bills and other credit instruments constituted an important part of the money supply (Henning, 1981). If this were the case, their bare existence would have influenced rates of exchange. Still, as long as bills were not freely negotiable, they were no fully-fledged substitutes for hard money. The question of how far they influenced rates of exchange therefore hinges on when negotiability became common. Despite some early instances (Munro, 1991), on the whole this was a development of the seventeenth century. There is no evidence that the endorsement of bills was practised in any Hanseatic town of the fourteenth, fifteenth or sixteenth centuries. Even in Flanders, credit instruments made a negligible contribution to monetary circulation (Blockmans, 1990, p. 26). Most exchange rates found in the sources, even those mentioned in account books and commercial letters, therefore ultimately reflect rates that developed in manual exchange. As for bills, too few are preserved to make it possible to make out a systematic difference between the rates mentioned in them and those based on manual exchange. Hence, it seems acceptable to use all quotations indiscriminately.8
A more serious problem is posed by the ambiguity and lack of clarity of the sources. Often enough, the merchant or official or whoever authored the document where the quotation is found did not bother clearly to define which kind of gold coin the exchange rate actually applied to. For example, in 1368 the Hamburg merchant Vicko von Geldersen noted that he paid 12s.4d. for 1 "olde scild" (Nirrnheim, 1895, p. 19). The "scild" could be either Flemish or French. In the first case, it could either be the écu d'or with the nominal value of 22 Flemish grotes which was struck since May 1349, or
8 In the appendix, where the exchange rates used in this paper are presented in full, their type is indicated, using the categories developed by Spufford (1986, pp. l ff.) in his "Handbook of Medieval Exchange".
16

the écu of 24 grotes which was issued since December 1354 (Blockmans and Blockmans, 1979, p. 86). In France, écus had been minted since 1266 (nominal value 120d.), 1337 (240d.), 1343 (672d.), 1349 (300d.), and 1351 (300d.) (Blanchet and Dieudonné, 1912, pp. 225, 247 f., 255, 267). Needless to say, not only the nominal value but also the fine gold content of all these coins differed. In some of these cases, it is possible to make a plausible guess: Thus, Hamburg had closer commercial links with Flanders than with France, so that the "olde scild" bought by Geldersen was probably Flemish and had been minted before 1354 (otherwise it would not be "old"). Other cases cannot be decided and must be left out of account. A related problem is posed by changes of the standard of the gold or silver coinage. If an exchange took place shortly after such a change, it is often impossible to make sure whether the coins that changed hands were newly minted or had already circulated for some time. Here, the same assumptions were made as in Nikolaus Wolf's and the author's (2006) recent paper about silver exchange rates: Debased coins dominated circulation more quickly than reenforced ones, and older coins continued to circulate abroad for a longer time than at home, where they had been minted.
Even if it is known which types of coins were exchanged, the problem remains of determining their content of specie. The principal class of sources that contain the relevant information are mint ordinances and contracts concluded between the authority who issued the coins and the mint master. Usually, such documents define the fineness of the alloy from which the coins were to be made, and the number of coins to be drawn from a specified quantity of that alloy. They could be straightforwardly interpreted if it were not for several obstacles. For one thing, in some cases there is no clarity about the exact metric equivalents of the units of weight used between the fourteenth and sixteenth centuries. Most scholars assume either for simplicity's sake (Kunzel, 1998) or based on complex metrological arguments (Munro, 1998) that at least some of them had the same weight as at the time of conversion to the metric system in 1789 or later, but for example for the Mark of Cologne, which was used in many German mints, this seems unlikely. Harald Witthöft (1991, p. 93), who spent a lifetime clearing a way through the maze of medieval metrology, asserts that its fifteenth-century weight was not 233.855 grams, as in the early nineteenth century, but rather 233.888 grams. The possibility of minor regional deviations cannot be discounted.
Apart from this, the ability of medieval and early modern mint technicians to make chemically pure gold and silver has been questioned. The Venetian mint may have been
17

able to refine gold to a purity of more than 23¾ carats (989.57/1000), but Venice was exceptional, its standard being not even reached by Florence (Lane and Mueller, 1985, pp. 179, 229). As for silver, in France the fineness of the so-called "argent-le-roy" that was used for coinage purposes was to be 11.5 deniers (958.18/1000), while in the Hanseatic area "lötiges Silber" of about 15.5 lots (968.75/1000) seems to have been the best that could be made (Miskimin, 1963, p. 31; Jesse, 1928, p. 160). The problem is that this introduces an ambiguity into the ordinances and mint master contracts: if such a document prescribed e.g. 21 carats, did that mean that the mint technician had to add 3 units of base metal (e.g. copper) to 21 units of gold of the maximum fineness that could be made, or that the finished coin had to contain 21/24 (875/1000) of fine gold? Lest the reader think these matters unduly arcane, the example of the Flemish écu of 1349 mentioned above will suffice to show that they could become quite important. According to the ordinance, 54 écus were to be drawn from a Marc de Troyes of gold of a fineness of 23¼ carats. Suppose that the metric equivalent of the Marc de Troyes, as used in the Netherlands, was 298.587 grams (Miskimin, quoted by Munro, 1998, p. 8), and that 23¼ carats defined the fineness of the finished coin. Its content of fine gold would then have been 5.357 grams. Suppose, on the other hand, that the Marc de Troyes had only 244.753 grams (as at the time of conversion to the metric system) and that the stipulation of 23¼ carats meant that the mint official had to add 0.75 units of base metal to 23.25 units of the best fine gold he could make, i.e. gold of a purity of say 980/1000. In this case, the finished écu would have contained only 4.303 grams of fine gold, that is, almost 20% less than if the first assumptions apply.
In the present analysis, the weight of the Marc de Troyes as established by Munro (1998) is used. For the Mark of Cologne, we follow Witthöft's (1991) arguments and assume that in the period of time considered here, it was slightly heavier than in the early nineteenth century. Other units used in Central and Eastern Europe were, according to Witthöft (1995, p. 234), linked to this Mark of Cologne by simple relations based on whole numbers. Thus the Mark of Kulm, used in Prussia, was equivalent to 13 lots of Cologne (cf. Ropp, 1878, p. 224); it consequently had a weight of 190.034 grams. Finally, for Italy, i.e. Florence and Venice, we use the metric equivalents of the local marks and pounds given in the recent relevant literature (Bernocchi, 1976; Lane and Mueller, 1985). As for the purity of fine gold and silver, the assumption made here is that the ordinances and contracts determined the fineness of the finished coins. This approach is acceptable because no mint master of the fourteenth to sixteenth centuries
18

could rely on being able to manufacture coins exactly to the prescribed standard anyway. The pieces were struck "al marco", that is, mint officials checked that the prescribed number of them held a prescribed weight, regardless of variations among the individual coins. This alone makes it impossible to exclude a margin of error when the bullion content of late medieval and early modern coins is determined.
A final problem is posed by the fact that once in circulation money became worn down and defaced. For silver, losses due to wear and tear have variously been estimated at between 2 and 2.75% per decade (Mayhew, 1974, p. 3) and between 0.25 and 0.87% per year (North, 1990, p. 108). Still, losses and wear and tear influenced the amount of specie in circulation, and therefore probably affected the level of prices, but as far as exchange rates are concerned, their effects were less important. Presumably, coins made of both metals suffered alike from defacement, so that its effects on gold and silver cancelled each other out.9 Still, for this reason, too, a margin of error is unavoidable.
Fortunately, there is a group of sources that helps us to reduce such errors to an acceptable minimum. Many late medieval and early modern authorities had foreign money assayed more or less regularly (cf. Ropp, 1878, pp. 223 f.; Cahn, 1895, pp. 169 ff.; Munro, 1972, p. 212 ff.). The interpretation of contemporary assays is, of course, problematic due to our imperfect knowledge of the metric equivalents of ancient units of weight, but if these sources are checked against the results of modern chemical tests (cf. Grierson, 1981; Kubiak, 1986), it is possible to derive a clear enough picture of how much gold and silver really changed hands when money was exchanged.
When all problems involved in determining the specie content of the coins in circulation have been solved, it is necessary once again to turn to the way the prices of gold and silver coins developed. These pieces of precious metal were not valued against some benchmark price that had been independently determined, but were solely subject to local supply and demand. Some of them were more popular than others, so that buyers were prepared to pay a premium. Thus, for a large part of the fourteenth century the florin of Florence was the most popular and widely used (and imitated: Berghaus, 1965; Giard, 1967) gold coin of Western Europe. In the fifteenth century, the Hungarian florin played a similar role further east, in Poland and Prussia. What follows from this is that gold-silver ratios that are determined for one place, but on the basis of different types of
9 Gold may have suffered less from wear and tear than silver. The hardness of both metals is about the same (2.5-3), but as the purchasing power of gold was higher, gold coins circulated slower. On the other hand, silver was more often alloyed to a higher degree with base metals, a practice which increased the hardness of silver money.
19

coins are not necessarily alike. For example, in 1378 the treasury of Hamburg reckoned 132 ducats at £84.13s.4d. and 48 francs at £28.16s. (Koppmann, 1869, p. 261). The first exchange rate gives a gold-silver ratio of 1:17.01, the second of 1:14.81. There are two ways out of this problem: Either, and this applies to the fourteenth century, the mean value of all ratios that can be found is established. Alternatively, when circulation was dominated by a single type of gold coin, as in Hamburg since the middle of the fifteenth century when the Rheingulden was the most popular type of gold, the ratios based on this are used and all others are ignored. Using this approach, and aggregating the gold-silver ratios that correspond to individual exchange rate quotations on a yearly level, it is possible to construct an almost unbroken time series that represents the development of the ratio in Hamburg. The following graph shows this. Fig. 4: The gold-silver ratio in Hamburg, 1350-1562
18
16
14
12
10
8
6 1350 1370 1390 1410 1430 1450 1470 1490 1510 1530 1550 1570
These data are contrasted with gold silver ratios from nineteen other places that had commercial links with Hamburg.10 The data for most of these are more scattered, the only comparable time series being from Cologne where the relevant material has been prepared by Rainer Metz (1990, pp. 366 ff.). However, the following section shows that this does not impede the analysis.
10 Amsterdam, Antwerp, Bruges, Cologne, Danzig, Deventer, Dordrecht, Elbing, Gnesen, Königsberg, London, Lübeck, Lüneburg, Lund, Marienburg, Middelburg, Posen, Stuhm, and Thorn.
20

3. Analysing the data

It is now time to analyse both sets of data introduced above ­ transmission costs as well

as gold-silver ratios ­ in context. In order to do so, it is useful briefly to consider the

approach used here from a more formal point of view. Thus, the exchange rate of some

type of gold coin sold in Hamburg for domestic silver money can be defined as

EH

=

kCH CG

,

where

k

represents

the

sum

in

Hamburg's

currency

(CH)

which

equalled

one

gold

coin

(CG).

The

par

ratio between these

currencies is

given

by

RH

=

kCH S CGG

.

Here, S is the silver equivalent of the unit of account used in Hamburg, that is, of the

Mark of Lübeck, and G is the fine gold content of the gold coin. Hamburg's gold-silver

ratio is the average of the par ratios found per year (i.e. RH'), subject to the restrictions described in the previous section. Ratios valid at the other places here considered (RL) are defined analogously and are, like those from Hamburg, aggregated on a yearly level.

Spreads between both aggregates are therefore given by  = RH '-RL ' .

These spreads are treated as the dependent variable that is to be explained by a number

of independent ones, among whom information costs ­ that is, messenger wages per

kilometre ­ are most important. To give an impression of how these wages developed

between 1350 and 1562, figure 5 charts their yearly average values. Because the

dependent variable refers to gold-silver ratios, and because a common standard of

measurement is needed, silver instead of nominal wages are used in the analysis. Silver

wages have the additional advantage of eliminating inflationary or deflationary effects

due to changes in the standard of the coinage. Moreover, in contrast to nominal wages

that rose practically over the whole period, they do not show any clear trend: In the

middle of the sixteenth century, they were not higher than 200 years before. Detrending

the data is therefore unnecessary.

21

1560 1550 1540 1530 1520 1510 1500 1490 1480 1470 1460 1450 1440 1430 1420 1410 1400 1390 1380 1370 1360 1350

Fig. 5: Messenger wages per kilometre, 1350-1562 (Index, 1461-65 = 100)
250
200
150
100
50
0
nominal wage silver wage
While the basic assumption of this study ­ i.e. that information costs impeded market integration ­ is plausible enough, it is obvious that the level of these costs was not the only relevant influence. Hence, it is necessary to control for a number of other variables. Integration studies usually stress the importance of transport costs, and though coins may have been inexpensive to ship, costs were certainly positive. Transport cost data do not exist, but given the lack of much progress in transport technology (Menard, 1991), the distance between Hamburg and the place where a gold-silver ratio was observed seems to be a good proxy: it should be positively correlated with differences between the ratios. However, transport costs have a wage component, and given the similarity of the development of the wages of messengers in Hamburg and masons in Antwerp, this component may have behaved in a comparable way. Testing for multicolinearity is therefore necessary. Further, what about the influence of infrastructure? Important differences in the quality of the roads linking Hamburg and her several trading partners probably did not exist, but it is well known that using roads was usually more expensive than sea transport. However, just making a distinction between between places that could be reached by sea and those that were landlocked is still unsatisfactory. Hamburg had much better
22

communications with the west, i.e. the Netherlands or England, than with the east, that is, Prussia or Poland. Eastern European ports could be reached only by first travelling overland to a place like Lübeck or Wismar and then continuing by sea, or by rounding the northern tip of Denmark and entering the Baltic via the Oeresund. Hence, it is possible to define two dummies in order to capture the infrastructure effect: one for Hamburg's trading partners in the west, i.e. for those which could be reached via either the North Sea or the Baltic, and another for inland places which were linked to Hamburg by road. Price differences between Hamburg and the western cities should be smaller than those between Hamburg and her Baltic partners, which in turn should be smaller than differences between Hamburg and cities which were landlocked. The coefficients for the dummies should show this.

Another factor is the currency union formed by Hamburg and Lübeck in 1255, and extended to Lüneburg and Wismar in 1379 (Stefke, 2002). Such a union can be expected to have reduced transaction costs, thereby favouring market integration, so that prices should differ less among member cities than between Hamburg and places that had a different currency. Here, this effect is captured by a dummy that takes the value 1 if a city where a gold-silver ratio was observed was a member of this currency union in the given year, and 0 if this was not the case. To link the dependent variable  to these independent variables, a simple OLS regression model is used:

log() = log(wage) + log(distance) + (west) + (inland) + (union) + c,

The result is given in the following table:

Dependent variable = log()

log(wage)

0.646

(5.02)**

log(dist)

0.067

(0.49)

west -0.335

(2.15)*

inland

0.041

(0.28)

union

-1.008

(3.68)**

Constant

1.015

(1.15)

Observations 500

Absolute value of t statistics in parentheses

R-sq 0.13 * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

23

The result does look quite promising: As expected, the influence of the costs of transmitting information (the wage-variable) comes out strongly and is highly significant. The weaker and in fact insignificant influence of transport costs is no surprise either. This result supports a central hypothesis of the present study: Information costs were relevant for the integration of financial markets, and given the favourable weight-value ratio which coins had, they were much more relevant than transport costs. Higher information costs significantly impeded the integration of financial markets, while lower costs obviously favoured exchange rate convergence. Another important insight is that even where a high-value and lightweight good like money was concerned, being landlocked was a drawback for economic integration. Markets with access to the sea integrated more easily, even if the sea-lanes were indirect or rather long, like those linking Hamburg and the Baltic. Also in line with what was expected, the influence of Hamburg's currency union with Lübeck, Lüneburg and Wismar comes out clearly and highly significantly. In fact, for the integration of financial markets, having the same currency seems to have been the single most important factor. And finally, the F-test shows that jointly, the independent variables do explain the dependent one. However, two problems remain: The R-sq is rather unsatisfactory, and there is still the possibility of multicolinearity between the variables.
As for the second problem, we can solve it by attempting to explain the messenger wages (as the dependent variable), using the others as independent variables. If there is indeed a strong relationship between the wages and the distance (as a proxy for transport costs), this should show up in the data. In fact, however, the regression yields a coefficient for log(dist) of barely 0.045 which is not even significant at 10%, and an R-sq of just 0.06. This is so small that the possibility of a strong linear relationship between the variables can be excluded; hence, the distance-variable can be safely retained.
What then can be done to improve the quality of the regression? The integration of financial markets was, of course, influenced by more factors than those included above. Thus, Mauro, Sussman and Yafeh (2006, pp. 91 ff.) found that in late nineteenthcentury Europe, news on wars and violence were significantly associated with higher spreads between bond prices. As in the period discussed here, wars and urban unrest were frequent occurrences, it is plausible to expect a similar effect on late medieval financial markets. However, while Mauro and his co-authors were able to collect data on the news coverage of wars etc., here it is just possible to define dummies which
24

indicate whether a city was affected by wars or internal unrest in a given year or fiveyear period.11 These dummies take the value of 1 if there were local disturbances in the years for which we have observations about gold-silver ratio differences; otherwise they have the value of 0. Two remarks about them are in order. First, because the dummies apply to years from which we have observations about ratio spreads, they designate not individual cities but city pairs. Hence, they overlap with the union and infrastructure dummies used above, and cannot be employed in the same regression. Second, it is important to point out that while unrest and war certainly affected financial markets, the direction of this influence is not evident without further information. In other words, under conditions of a system of commodity money based on both precious metals, we can not prima facie know whether such disturbances caused a local rise in the price of gold or in that of silver, thereby increasing or reducing the difference to the ratio valid in Hamburg. Despite the plausibility of the assumption that wars and unrest affected integration, we therefore cannot tell whether the coefficients will be positive or negative. Apart from introducing disturbance-dummies, it is possible to improve the regression by using panel date. After all, we have wage-data for four types of messengers (mounted messengers, regular runners, other familiares and occasional runners) from the years between 1350 and 1562. A hausman-test having indicated that a random-effects regression is appropriate, we use the following equation: log() = log(wage) + log(dist) +  ...k(disturbance_citypair) + c The result is given in this table:
11 The relevant information is taken from Blockmans and Prevenier (1999), Boockmann (1992), Dollinger (1964/88), Ennen (1865; 1875), Gabrielsson (1982); Hoffmann (1988), Nicholas (1992), Postel (1982) and Reinecke (1933).
25

Dependent variable = log()

log(wage)

0.618

(4.88)**

log(dist)

0.200

(2.40)*

hamburg

0.164

(0.85)

amsterdam -0.685

(1.49)

antwerp

0.000

(.)

bruges

0.750

(2.53)*

cologne

-0.818

(4.55)**

danzig

0.000

(.)

deventer

0.000

(.)

dordrecht

-2.133

(3.89)**

elbing

0.000

(.)

gnesen

0.000

(.)

Observations

500

Number of groups 4

koenigsberg london luebeck lueneburg lund marienburg middelburg posen stuhm thorn Constant

0.122 (0.16) 0.104 (0.50) -3.776 (5.55)** 0.000 (.) 0.000 (.) 0.198 (0.31) 0.000 (.) 0.000 (.) 0.000 (.) -0.149 (0.19) 0.052 (0.09)

Absolute value of z statistics in parentheses * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

Interestingly, the relevant variables, that is, those in which we are principally interested, have not changed very much. The influence of information costs still comes out strongly and highly significantly, while that of transport costs is much weaker and less significant. The most important difference between this regression and the simpler variant shown above is the higher R-sq: In this case, it is 0.21.

Still, almost 80% of the differences between the exchange rates at Hamburg and at the other places here considered remain unaccounted for. This is probably due to the low quality and number of data and variables. Defining dummies for war and urban unrest can never give more than a vague impression of conditions during the time analysed here. In particular during the fourteenth and fifteenth century, being at peace or war was not really a question of either ­ or, but rather one of more or less. Some major wars can, of course, be identified, for example the one which devastated Prussia between 1454 and 1466, or that waged by Charles the Bold in the vicinity of Cologne in 1473-74. However, on the whole it is difficult to make a clear-cut distinction between all-out wars and everyday low-level violence of the type of feuds. Particularly in Germany

26

feuding was going on practically continuously (Volckart, 2004). Any war-dummy defined for specific places and years has therefore a strong element of arbitrariness. This probably accounts for much of the low R-sq in the regression shown above.
With regard to the quality of the data, it should be remembered that transmitting information involved economies of scale, so that messenger wages can never be more than a rough indicator for transmission costs. Moreover, it has been shown above that while there was quite a strong correlation between the distances messengers covered and the sums they received, it was far from unambigous. This may have been caused by a large number of influences that are impossible to analyse, such as the age and experience of the messenger, his speed, the type of document he carried etc. Finally, it should be kept in mind that in determining fourteenth- to sixteenth-century gold-silver ratios a margin of error cannot be avoided. As a rule, not too much should be read into or expected from the few surviving data from the late Middle Ages and the early modern period. However, all this does not detract from the main result of the above analysis: The wages of messengers are a useful proxy for the costs of transmitting information, and had a strong and highly significant influence on the integration of the gold market.
4. Conclusion
This article is motivated by the desire to give more substance to the concept of transaction costs that is frequently invoked by economic historians inspired by New Institutional Economics. The approach is to isolate information costs as a component of transaction costs which has central importance, then to split information costs into their constitutive components, and finally to measure one of these, namely transmission costs, i.e. the costs of transmitting information between different localities. Additionally, the effects these costs had on the integration of financial markets in fourteenth- to sixteenth-century Northern Europe are explored. The underlying assumption is that arbitrage on the money market was relatively little impeded by transport costs, whereas transmission costs had a comparatively strong influence. Briefly, the paper aims at testing the hypothesis that the integration financial markets depended on the level of the costs which were involved in transmitting information, high costs being correlated with weakly integrated markets, while low costs favoured convergence.
27

In order to measure transmission costs, the article draws on the account books of the treasury of Hamburg. There, the sums paid to messengers whom the council of the city sent are recorded in a way that makes it possible to calculate how much they received per kilometre. A comparison of the sums paid to regular and occasional messengers shows that the payments did not have the character of expense allowances, as has sometimes been claimed in the literature, but were indeed wages that were probably individually negotiated between the messengers and the financial administration of Hamburg. At the same time, the comparison suggests that the sums recorded in the accounts are representative of messenger wages in general, i.e. of those wages which messengers sent by merchants were paid, too. Hence, it is possible to treat the perkilometre wages as general indicators of how the costs of transmitting information developed.
The integration of financial markets is examined on the basis of exchange rates of gold coins for silver, and of the specie content of the coins which changed hands. These data are used to construct local gold-silver ratio series which can then be compared; differences between them are treated as indicators of opportunities for arbitrage which were forgone. While the exchange rate quotations found in the sources are relatively unambiguous (leaving aside the problem of rates based on bills of exchange, which cannot be decided on the basis of the surviving material), it is more difficult to determine the fineness of gold and silver coins. For one thing, a number of exchange rate quotations are so vague that the types of the coins involved cannot be established, and for another, it is sometimes difficult to reach a definite conclusion with regard to their fineness. Even if the information gleaned from the sources is checked against the results of modern chemical tests, a margin of error remains. In the present study, the ratio valid in Hamburg is contrasted with that of nineteen other places. Differences between both ratios are related to the yearly averages of the wages of several groups of messengers.
The analysis yields three important results: First, in contrast to hypotheses hitherto advanced with regard to transaction costs in general and information costs in particular, it has become evident that neither institutional nor technical change had a strong influence on the development of transmission costs. This does not mean that such influences did not exist; it just means that the relevance of such factors cannot be estimated and anyway pales in comparison to the one dominant influence: the supply of labour. Under pre-industrial conditions, transmitting information was extremely labour
28

intensive; in fact, most of Hamburg's messengers went on foot, so that not even the prices of horses and oats or similar factors played a role. Transmission costs were essentially labour costs, and hence dependent on the labour supply. The recurring waves of the plague in the late fourteenth and fifteenth century reduced the supply of labour; therefore, the real wages of messengers in Hamburg peaked in about 1460-70. From then on, population began to recover; the supply of labour grew, and wages fell. In real terms, the per-kilometre costs of transmitting information in the mid-sixteenth century were less than half of what they had been about 100 years before. Despite being reached on the basis of sources from just one city, this result probably applies to all Western and Northern Europe. After all, a comparison with wages paid in other professions and at other places shows a roughly parallel development. Consequently, there is no reason to suppose that messenger wages ­ and therefore the costs of transmitting information ­ in for example Antwerp or Paris behaved any different than in Hamburg. The important point is that in the late Middle Ages and at the beginning of the early modern period, this component of information- and transaction costs can be closely identified with the costs of labour.
The second important result of the analysis presented above is that transmission costs had a clear and positive influence on the integration of financial markets. In other words, the hypothesis which this study set out to test ­ i.e. that the integration of the these markets was inversely correlated with the development of the costs of transmitting information ­ has been fully confirmed: When messenger wages ­ expressed in grams of silver ­ were high, differences between gold prices ­ likewise expressed in grams of silver ­ were large. The regressions presented above show that this correlation was strong and highly significant. They also show that the influence of information costs was much stronger and more significant that that of transport costs. This is as it should be, given the favourable weight value ratio of commodity money: Transport was cheap, and profiting from arbitrage on financial markets required paying for information about exchange rate differences.
Is it possible to draw any conclusions with regard to the integration of other markets? While the importance of transport costs obviously depended on the weight-value ratio of the good, this was not true for information costs. Information costs had a similar influence on the integration of all markets. In order to profit from an opportunity for arbitrage, a merchant had first to acquire the necessary information, regardless of whether he planned to sell grain or money. Before he had found out or had at least
29

developed rational expectations about potential buyers and about the relevant prices, transport was not even an issue. Hence, when markets became better integrated in the course of the late fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, this was not due to technical advances in transport ­ which were anyway negligible ­ but to the reduction in information costs due to the fall of messenger wages. The third result is of a more general nature. The present paper aims at contributing to an estimation of how transaction costs developed in the pre-statistical age. Hitherto, attempts to capture these costs and their effects either aimed at determining the size of the transaction sector or the costs involved in concluding specific types of transactions. By contrast, the approach used here is based on splitting transaction costs into their components and measuring one of these. This method has been shown to be viable: it is not only possible to measure how this cost-component developed, but also how it influenced market performance. Altogether, this suggests that with the help of further studies, which focus on those components of transaction costs not analysed here, it should be possible to derive a relatively comprehensive picture of the development of transaction costs and of their importance over time.
30

Appendix
1. Messenger wages from Hamburg

Mounted messengers

Observations (identifiable destinations only)

1350

0

1370

0

1371

0

1372

0

1373

0

1374

0

1375

0

1376

0

1377

0

1378

0

1379

0

1380

0

1381

0

1382

0

1383

0

1384

0

1385

0

1386

0

1387

0

1461

0

1462

0

1463

1

1464

0

1465

0

1466

1

1467

1

1468

2

Mark of Lübeck per
kilometre
0.0043 0.0030 0.0040 0.0043

Grams of Kilometres silver per per mission kilometre

0.0877

115.32

0.0603 0.0804 0.0881

115.32 115.32 115.32

Regular runners

Observations (identifiable destinations only)
0 62 75 70 38 51 29 56 30 47 48 33 29 22 15 17 11 16 23 32 34 21 24 18 30 25 17

Mark of Lübeck per
kilometre
0.0026 0.0026 0.0030 0.0034 0.0030 0.0032 0.0033 0.0037 0.0027 0.0026 0.0026 0.0034 0.0031 0.0033 0.0036 0.0033 0.0035 0.0043 0.0103 0.0068 0.0071 0.0060 0.0060 0.0054 0.0056 0.0072

Grams of Kilometres

Wage-

silver per per mission distance

kilometre

corr. coeff.

0.1580 0.1614 0.1850 0.2087 0.1869 0.1674 0.1691 0.1894 0.1381 0.1393 0.1417 0.1852 0.1692 0.1786 0.1914 0.1735 0.1849 0.2264 0.2094 0.1382 0.1444 0.1205 0.1214 0.1092 0.1139 0.1466

106.71 108.23 117.20 137.97 116.01 153.74 141.53 162.87 122.64
97.35 127.02 136.56 163.03 214.85
99.20 215.65 114.99 151.50 174.97 146.25 153.81 177.69 240.38 166.47 211.78 189.45

0.7828 0.8305 0.8406 0.9594 0.6123 0.8274 0.7796 0.8113 0.6329 0.2940 0.7700 0.8169 0.5611 0.9738 0.5950 0.9696 0.7315 0.8007 0.7101 0.8942 0.9177 0.8061 0.7739 0.8024 0.9732 0.7843

31

Mounted messengers

Observations (identifiable destinations only)

1469

1

1470

0

1471

3

1472

0

1473

0

1474

0

1475

0

1476

1

1477

0

1478

0

1479

0

1480

0

1481

0

1482

0

1483

0

1484

0

1485

0

1486

0

1487

0

1488

0

1489

0

1490

0

1491

0

1492

0

1493

1

1494

1

1495

0

1496

1

1497

0

1498

0

1499

1

1500

1

Mark of Lübeck per
kilometre 0.0027 0.0026
0.0048
0.0065 0.0060
0.0098 0.0113

Grams of Kilometres silver per per mission kilometre

0.0551

115.32

0.0519

138.68

0.0979

64.92

0.1322 0.1212

115.32 115.32

0.1983 0.2297

115.32 365.16

Regular runners

Observations (identifiable destinations only)
14 36 19 21 15 13 21 11 10 11 9 3 6 2 11 9 11 18 24 16 23 17 8 7 14 8 5 10 20 20 30 19

Mark of Lübeck per
kilometre
0.0070 0.0061 0.0056 0.0060 0.0062 0.0069 0.0061 0.0085 0.0059 0.0061 0.0051 0.0048 0.0053 0.0063 0.0061 0.0077 0.0063 0.0057 0.0070 0.0067 0.0060 0.0073 0.0088 0.0077 0.0068 0.0072 0.0066 0.0066 0.0065 0.0062 0.0066 0.0050

Grams of Kilometres

Wage-

silver per per mission distance

kilometre

corr. coeff.

0.1429 0.1243 0.1145 0.1220 0.1269 0.1411 0.1233 0.1727 0.1192 0.1248 0.1031 0.0975 0.1076 0.1274 0.1249 0.1570 0.1274 0.1150 0.1431 0.1359 0.1216 0.1482 0.1786 0.1564 0.1385 0.1465 0.1346 0.1351 0.1312 0.1260 0.1334 0.1013

196.79 146.76 135.96 205.83 225.37 359.31 157.84 165.22
94.02 169.86 142.25
72.88 153.30 177.60 147.46 122.10 191.35 187.60 287.28 119.11 176.35 153.94 371.03 125.72 181.81 451.74 111.89 222.82 131.98 188.05 171.13 145.92

0.9732 0.5731 0.7926 0.9498 0.6885 0.8831 0.9166 0.9774 0.6351 0.9165 0.9928 0.8421 0.9318 1.0000 0.1182 0.9701 0.7962 0.7821 0.7914 0.7970 0.8519 0.8600 0.9973 0.7978 0.8363 0.9881 0.9351 0.9982 0.7736 0.7854 0.8263 0.3325

32

Mounted messengers

Observations (identifiable destinations only)

1522

0

1523

0

1524

0

1525

0

1526

0

1527

0

1528

0

1529

0

1530

0

1531

0

1532

0

1533

1

1534

0

1535

0

1536

3

1537

0

1538

0

1539

0

1540

0

1541

0

1542

0

1543

0

1544

0

1545

1

1546

0

1547

0

1548

0

1549

4

1550

1

1551

0

1552

2

1553

1

Mark of Lübeck per
kilometre
0.0130 0.0130
0.0250 0.0226 0.0563 0.0206 0.0225

Grams of Kilometres silver per per mission kilometre

0.2297

115.32

0.2297

115.32

0.4572

115.32

0.4136 1.0281
0.3624 0.3957

458.22 103.31
160.70 115.32

Regular runners

Observations (identifiable destinations only)
0 1 2 5 4 9 3 10 16 10 5 2 7 5 5 4 9 11 12 8 16 11 19 10 7 5 11 14 12 6 8 7

Mark of Lübeck per
kilometre
0.0049 0.0052 0.0055 0.0092 0.0048 0.0068 0.0076 0.0054 0.0057 0.0054 0.0052 0.0073 0.0069 0.0073 0.0081 0.0064 0.0094 0.0128 0.0115 0.0097 0.0086 0.0094 0.0107 0.0110 0.0094 0.0092 0.0138 0.0144 0.0237 0.0110 0.0154

Grams of Kilometres

Wage-

silver per per mission distance

kilometre

corr. coeff.

0.0873 0.0914 0.0973 0.1627 0.0848 0.1204 0.1348 0.0949 0.1000 0.0959 0.0911 0.1287 0.1215 0.1289 0.1424 0.1126 0.1669 0.2258 0.2024 0.1721 0.1512 0.1710 0.1957 0.2017 0.1709 0.1675 0.2524 0.2624 0.4332 0.1938 0.2706

88.52 127.29 198.53 213.60 218.00 154.69 144.95 157.58 118.55 299.44 146.95 105.45 145.12 264.64 589.06 258.34 384.99 496.87 583.90 379.88 386.31 306.83 507.78 444.33 162.60 219.58 284.24 410.06 700.43 328.08 612.70

0.9482 0.3497 0.9849 0.5054 0.7782 0.5101 0.6396 0.9969
0.9320 0.0073 0.4964 0.9830 0.9631 0.8650 0.6895 0.7716 0.9600 0.7491 0.8835 0.7755 0.9761 0.8768 0.9383 0.8760 0.9472 0.5731 0.9975 0.7910

33

Mounted messengers

Observations (identifiable destinations only)

1554

1

1555

0

1556

0

1557

0

1558

0

1559

0

1560

0

1561 1562

1 0

Mark of Lübeck per
kilometre 0.0336
0.0235

Grams of Kilometres silver per per mission kilometre

0.5912

115.32

0.4138

576.77

Regular runners

Observations (identifiable destinations only)
18
14 6
6 15
11 16
9 6

Mark of Lübeck per
kilometre
0.0173 0.0174 0.0230 0.0157 0.0187 0.0183 0.0143 0.0180 0.0190

Grams of Kilometres

Wage-

silver per per mission distance

kilometre

corr. coeff.

0.3048 0.3054 0.4049 0.2754 0.3292 0.3213 0.2519 0.3170 0.3343

514.48 720.31 831.89 407.38 329.42 654.77 253.09 638.87 907.54

0.9013 0.7994 0.5936 0.9689 0.9724 0.9530 0.9654 0.9268 0.7833

Other familiares

Observations (identifiable destinations only)

Mark of Lübeck per
kilometre

Grams of Kilometres

Wage-

silver per per mission distance

kilometre

corr. coeff.

Occasional messengers

Observations (identifiable destinations only)

Mark of Lübeck per
kilometre

Grams of Kilometres silver per per mission kilometre

Wagedistance
corr. coeff.

1350 1370 1371 1372 1373 1374 1375 1376 1377 1378 1379 1380 1381 1382

37 18 18 50 33 28 12 7 19 18 20 30 18 23

0.0022 0.0030 0.0027 0.0046 0.0037 0.0036 0.0028 0.0044 0.0033 0.0024 0.0032 0.0027 0.0047 0.0035

0.1413 0.1861 0.1678 0.2838 0.2279 0.2240 0.1449 0.2276 0.1733 0.1230 0.1713 0.1468 0.2524 0.1881

97.11 82.26 103.46 114.99 127.94 116.18 99.78 71.17 124.60 98.67 92.05 90.06 89.60 100.86

0.4977 0.4280 0.7811 0.5608 0.8886 0.6807 0.7649 0.6021 0.6586 0.8900 0.8613 0.6147 0.4806 0.6229
34

53 56
55 10 23 36 42 23 13 10 7 6 7 4

0.0023 0.0034 0.0030 0.0040 0.0034 0.0037 0.0034 0.0035 0.0030 0.0027 0.0027 0.0026 0.0026 0.0036

0.1490 0.2068 0.1861 0.2451 0.2089 0.2264 0.1765 0.1826 0.1544 0.1421 0.1472 0.1395 0.1399 0.1924

117.68 90.87
120.80 83.19 96.79
117.49 126.97 121.42 101.60 102.91 114.30 152.88
86.12 112.32

0.7084 0.6256 0.5475 0.0227 0.2970 0.2776 0.8163 0.7209 0.4901 0.1679 0.2523 0.0074 0.8314 0.9430

Other familiares

Observations (identifiable destinations only)

1383

10

1384

16

1385

15

1386

13

1387

25

1461

0

1462

0

1463

1

1464

3

1465

4

1466

0

1467

4

1468

20

1469

14

1470

14

1471

18

1472

15

1473

4

1474

9

1475

6

1476

13

1477

4

1478

10

1479

2

1480

18

1481

15

1482

26

1483

3

1484

3

1485

1

1486

2

1487

3

Mark of Lübeck per
kilometre
0.0040 0.0032 0.0034 0.0036 0.0036
0.0097 0.0053 0.0077
0.0058 0.0069 0.0068 0.0063 0.0056 0.0070 0.0067 0.0053 0.0073 0.0061 0.0055 0.0057 0.0043 0.0041 0.0059 0.0048 0.0043 0.0131 0.0070 0.0065 0.0050

Grams of Kilometres

Wage-

silver per per mission distance

kilometre

corr. coeff.

0.2128 0.1688 0.1810 0.1930 0.1900

128.82 111.73
96.54 74.51 84.30

0.5141 0.8582 0.7200 0.4797 0.5436

0.1970 0.1067 0.1562
0.1177 0.1411 0.1391 0.1289 0.1134 0.1430 0.1369 0.1073 0.1487 0.1240 0.1124 0.1165 0.0883 0.0839 0.1194 0.0970 0.0866 0.2662 0.1432 0.1315 0.1012

372.28 414.65
99.34
97.00 169.68 165.71
95.76 177.85
89.25 89.92 133.44 92.11 109.63 83.52 113.66 84.11 208.99 193.24 306.63 130.21 162.94 115.32 78.43 85.92

0.0016
0.0156 0.8234 0.8425 0.4359 0.8267 0.7085 0.9978 0.5685 0.2464 0.8888 0.9903 0.8053
0.9818 0.9759 0.9164
0.5192
0.9964

Occasional messengers

Observations (identifiable destinations only)
9 6 24 7 4 13 13 14 19 14 29 21 4 11 10 3 3 4 9 4 7 5 6 14 13 12 6 18 7 5 9 10

Mark of Lübeck per
kilometre
0.0036 0.0018 0.0040 0.0044 0.0031 0.0069 0.0071 0.0065 0.0047 0.0045 0.0041 0.0070 0.0053 0.0067 0.0061 0.0075 0.0064 0.0053 0.0068 0.0067 0.0065 0.0061 0.0076 0.0059 0.0061 0.0057 0.0060 0.0063 0.0045 0.0063 0.0070 0.0083

Grams of Kilometres silver per per mission kilometre

0.1952 0.0963 0.2134 0.2349 0.1655 0.1393 0.1440 0.1308 0.0957 0.0904 0.0826 0.1423 0.1087 0.1368 0.1234 0.1519 0.1293 0.1079 0.1373 0.1363 0.1324 0.1235 0.1547 0.1194 0.1234 0.1154 0.1219 0.1289 0.0911 0.1276 0.1420 0.1686

137.40 99.01
136.73 95.39 89.90
152.92 169.12 175.58 152.11 104.31 101.51 166.34 232.41 296.68 211.23 189.56 187.14 145.75 166.31
97.52 163.73 208.17 102.26 159.68 138.77 242.10 144.20 152.78 119.37 303.99 268.65 146.73

Wagedistance
corr. coeff.
0.8250 0.0100 0.7524 0.7078 0.8155 0.3592 0.8236 0.5974 0.7493 0.6188 0.2874 0.9633 0.9362 0.7194 0.6064
0.0273 0.9480 0.9505 0.5973 0.8792 0.9961 0.8543 0.9317 0.8274 0.9211 0.9607 0.8950 0.0082 0.9888 0.4547 0.5813

35

Other familiares

Observations (identifiable destinations only)

1488

1

1489

0

1490

4

1491

9

1492

2

1493

4

1494

3

1495

5

1496

1

1497

2

1498

3

1499

6

1500

3

1522

4

1523

2

1524

1

1525

1

1526

0

1527

1

1528

2

1529

0

1530

0

1531

1

1532

0

1533

0

1534

1

1535

0

1536

0

1537

0

1538

0

1539

0

1540

0

Mark of Lübeck per
kilometre
0.0109
0.0052 0.0168 0.0102 0.0088 0.0071 0.0071 0.0088 0.0064 0.0091 0.0114 0.0073 0.0061 0.0055 0.0057 0.0053
0.0053 0.0082
0.0054
0.0524

Grams of Kilometres

Wage-

silver per per mission distance

kilometre

corr. coeff.

0.2212

103.41

0.1050 0.3423 0.2064 0.1786 0.1453 0.1436 0.1784 0.1304 0.1841 0.2316 0.1481 0.1075 0.0976 0.1002 0.0935

128.57 168.65 152.44 187.10 260.18 119.45
42.74 130.78 361.74 251.35 158.39 177.24 272.66 396.56
94.46

0.0053 0.9723
0.9929 0.9986 0.0078
0.9993 0.7064 0.9715 0.8116

0.0935 0.1447

94.46 62.70

0.0957

115.32

0.9254

23.86

Occasional messengers

Observations (identifiable destinations only)
12 3 12 12 12 3 11 9 6 21 3 20 14 34 21 12 30 11 11 22 23 29 24 33 31 28 58 47 49 29 32 37

Mark of Lübeck per
kilometre
0.0074 0.0094 0.0077 0.0094 0.0104 0.0110 0.0096 0.0067 0.0068 0.0066 0.0073 0.0065 0.0053 0.0056 0.0053 0.0049 0.0050 0.0052 0.0066 0.0060 0.0069 0.0063 0.0057 0.0075 0.0075 0.0072 0.0073 0.0080 0.0084 0.0084 0.0096 0.0087

Grams of Kilometres silver per per mission kilometre

0.1513 0.1901 0.1566 0.1915 0.2109 0.2226 0.1954 0.1362 0.1392 0.1350 0.1491 0.1323 0.1068 0.0984 0.0934 0.0871 0.0890 0.0917 0.1169 0.1052 0.1211 0.1110 0.1011 0.1318 0.1326 0.1272 0.1294 0.1407 0.1487 0.1479 0.1703 0.1544

266.77 115.64 212.57 342.68 228.95 388.37 218.21 254.97 335.22 155.22 125.26 210.29 121.97 167.71 161.97 205.55 207.96 178.62 153.81 153.28 206.07 165.16 234.23 261.62 184.92 153.05 171.70 204.72 333.01 244.24 158.65 156.97

Wagedistance
corr. coeff.
0.9046 1.0000 0.7313 0.6284 0.7270 0.7816 0.8215 0.6316 0.9453 0.7373 1.0000 0.9235 0.8039 0.8850 0.5380 0.9974 0.8814 0.6475 0.8419 0.6101 0.2918 0.6642 0.6112 0.8356 0.7636 0.9092 0.7653 0.7120 0.8754 0.9121 0.6404 0.7607

36

Other familiares

Observations (identifiable destinations only)

1541

0

1542

0

1543

1

1544

1

1545

1

1546

0

1547

1

1548

1

1549

1

1550

4

1551

3

1552

0

1553

0

1554

1

1555

0

1556

0

1557

0

1558

1

1559

0

1560

1

1561 1562

0 1

Mark of Lübeck per
kilometre
0.0212 0.0088 0.0102
0.0081 0.0115 0.0087 0.0146 0.0183
0.0396
0.0481
0.0150 0.0060

Grams of Kilometres

Wage-

silver per per mission distance

kilometre

corr. coeff.

0.3740 0.1603 0.1857
0.1485 0.2094 0.1584 0.2666 0.3336

94.46 42.74 49.20
115.32 436.36 115.32 340.29 651.85

0.9982 0.9628

0.6962

189.56

0.8464 0.2637 0.1057

41.58 83.42 967.77

Occasional messengers

Observations (identifiable destinations only)
31 41 29 13 45 36 22 46 26 53 22 23 23 20 23 25 32 48 25 55 63 58

Mark of Lübeck per
kilometre
0.0087 0.0082 0.0087 0.0110 0.0081 0.0097 0.0088 0.0111 0.0104 0.0118 0.0108 0.0114 0.0088 0.0098 0.0117 0.0119 0.0132 0.0128 0.0133 0.0125 0.0125 0.0125

Grams of Kilometres silver per per mission kilometre

0.1529 0.1452 0.1529 0.2010 0.1478 0.1773 0.1600 0.2034 0.1904 0.2165 0.1981 0.2010 0.1549 0.1723 0.2067 0.2087 0.2326 0.2247 0.2340 0.2203 0.2198 0.2195

176.91 192.11 209.13 255.75 213.79 200.68 122.41 175.36 194.69 177.40 153.34 168.41 187.20 156.53 234.33 258.71 211.57 153.10 270.23 163.27 185.79 203.27

Wagedistance
corr. coeff.
0.9375 0.7085 0.9034 0.7561 0.9285 0.9359 0.6110 0.6249 0.7307 0.8566 0.8172 0.5518 0.9197 0.5674 0.8950 0.9440 0.9001 0.7610 0.9433 0.0996 0.6819 0.6575

37

2. Exchange rates and gold-silver ratios
Quotation types: A = account book, B = bill of exchange, C = commercial rate (vaguely defined), H = historian (no primary source given, no information about the type of quotation), L = loan, M = manual exchange (politically imposed fixed exchange rates are not included) (cf. Spufford, 1986, pp. l. ff.).
Hamburg

yyyy-mm-dd
1352-00-00 1352-00-00 1352-00-00 1353-00-00 1353-00-00 1353-00-00 1354-00-00 1354-00-00 1355-00-00 1355-00-00 1356-00-00 1356-00-00 1356-00-00 1356-00-00 1358-00-00 1362-00-00 1366-00-00 1368-00-00 1368-00-00 1370-00-00 1370-00-00 1374-00-00 1374-00-00 1375-00-00 1375-00-00 1375-00-00

sum1
6 florenis 12 florenis aureis 40 florenis aureis 1000 florenis 20 florenis 6 florenis 10 florenis 200 Lübeck fl. 25 florenis 108 scudatos 10 florenis 1 floren 6 florenis 12 florenis 15 scudatis 63 florenis 24 florenis aureis 1 olde scild 1 antiquus schudatus 6 florens 13 florenis aureis 10 florenis aureis 4 florenis aureis 3 ghuldenen (lüb.?) 10 florens aureos 12 florenis aureis

sum2
3m. lüb. 6m.4d. lüb. £17.3s. 4d. lüb. £404.3s. 4d. lüb. £8.4s. lüb. 51s. lüb. 5m.20d. lüb. £85.lüb. £11.3s. lüb. £58.3s. lüb. £4.6s. lüb. 9s. preter 4d. lüb. 55s. lüb. 7m. lüb. £8 lüb. £30.3s. lüb. £12 lüb. 12s.4d. lüb. 12½s. lüb. £3 lüb. £6½.4s.4d. lüb. £5½ lüb. 45s.4d. lüb. 2m.1s. lüb. £5½.5s. lüb. £7.4s. lüb.

place
Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg
38

type Source
A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 31) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 32) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 32) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 35) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 37) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 37) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 43) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 41) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 48) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 48) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 53) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 53) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 53) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 53) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 65) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 81) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 96) C (Nirrnheim, 1895, p. 19) C (Nirrnheim, 1895, p. 19) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 125) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 126) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 188) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 204) C (Nirrnheim, 1895, p. 99) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 222) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 224)

quantity Au quantity Ag ratio

20.8869 41.7737 139.2457 3481.1419 69.6228 20.8869 34.8114 698.1372 87.0285 367.1294 34.8114
3.4811 20.8869 41.7737 50.9902 219.3119 83.5474
3.9659 3.9659 20.8869 45.2548 34.8114 13.9246 10.2518 34.8114 41.7737

193.6156 9.27 388.5758 9.30 1384.8895 9.95 32605.4091 9.37 661.5201 9.50 205.7166 9.85 329.4155 9.46 6857.2201 9.82 899.5059 10.34 4691.1452 12.78 346.8947 9.96
34.9584 10.04 221.8512 10.62 451.7698 10.81 645.3854 12.66 2432.2963 11.09 923.2401 11.05
47.4443 11.96 48.0854 12.12 230.8100 11.05 516.7580 11.42 519.2424 14.92 213.9908 15.37 155.7727 15.19 542.8444 15.59 679.7355 16.27

yyyy-mm-dd sum1
1376-00-00 1 floren 1376-00-00 12 florenis aureis 1378-00-00 48 francen 1378-00-00 132 ducats 1379-00-00 1 floren 1379-00-00 48 francen 1379-00-00 132 ducats 1379-00-00 10 ducats 1380-00-00 10 ducats 1381-00-00 20 florenis aureis 1381-00-00 11 florenis aureis 1382-00-00 3 florenis 1382-00-00 29 ducats 1383-00-00 12 florenis 1383-00-00 60 florenis aureis 1383-00-00 12 florenis aureis 1384-00-00 40 florenis 1385-00-00 10 florenis aureis 1385-00-00 26 Rheingulden 1386-00-00 1 floren 1391-00-00 1 floren 1391-00-00 20 ducats 1391-11-11 5 vranken 1396-00-00 3 florenis 1397-00-00 1 floren 1397-00-00 1 floren 1399-00-00 33 florens 1399-00-00 48 noble 1400-00-00 8 olde schilde 1400-00-00 50 florenis 1400-00-00 (c.) 1 noble 1401-00-00 100 noble 1402-00-00 20 florenis 1402-00-00 100 Rheingulden 1409-00-00 10 Rheingulden

sum2
12s. lüb. £7.4s. lüb. £28.16s. lüb. £84.13s. 4d. lüb. 10s. lüb. £28.16s. lüb. £84.13s. 4d. lüb. £6½ lüb. £6½ lüb. £12 lüb. £7.4s. lüb. 24s. lüb. £18½.7s. lüb. £6½.8s. lüb. £35½ lüb. £7.2s. lüb. £23 lüb. £5½ lüb. £14½.9s. lüb. 12s. lüb. 10s. lüb. £13.6½s.2d. lüb. £1 grote 46½s. lüb. 8s. lüb. 10s. lüb. 15m. lüb. £14.8s. grote 7½m. lüb. £33.6½s.2d. lüb. 30s. lüb. £150 lüb. £7 lüb. £67 lüb. £6.15s. lüb.

place
Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg
39

type Source
A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 241) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 241) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 261) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 261) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 291) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 280) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 280) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 276) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 307) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 327) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 328) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 347) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 349) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 370) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 370) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 369) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 391) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 415) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 415) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 439) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 476) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 476) C (Hanserecesse, 1877, p. 31) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 483) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 484) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 483) C (Nirrnheim, 1930, p. 45) C (Nirrnheim, 1930, p. 5) C (Nirrnheim, 1930, p. 69) A (Koppmann, 1869, p. 490) C (Nirrnheim, 1895, p. 127) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 2) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 3) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 3) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 15)

quantity Au quantity Ag ratio

3.4811 41.7737 183.5647 469.8793 3.4811 183.5647 469.8793 35.5969 35.5969 69.6228 38.2926 10.4434 103.2311 41.7737 208.8685 41.7737 139.2457 34.8114 88.2984 3.4811 3.4811 71.1938 19.1213 10.3595 3.4532 3.4532 113.9550 362.2320 31.7272 172.6591 7.5465 754.6500 55.5541 332.2266 32.4844

56.6446 16.27 679.7355 16.27 2718.9422 14.81 7993.1865 17.01 47.2039 13.56 2718.9422 14.81 7993.1865 17.01 613.6501 17.24 437.2932 12.28 807.3105 11.60 484.3863 12.65 80.7311 7.73 1268.1503 12.28 464.2036 11.11 2388.2937 11.43 477.6587 11.43 1547.3452 11.11 361.7947 10.39 983.4238 11.14 39.4685 11.34 32.8904 9.45 877.0781 12.32 256.7832 13.43 143.1022 13.81 24.6197 7.13 30.7747 8.91 708.9336 6.22 3730.1132 10.30 354.4668 11.17 1969.2600 11.41 88.6167 11.74 8861.6702 11.74 413.5446 7.44 3958.2127 11.91 362.4660 11.16

yyyy-mm-dd
1410-00-00 1410-00-00 1411-00-00 1411-00-00 1412-00-00 1412-00-00 1415-00-00 1418-00-00 1419-00-00 1421-00-00 1424-00-00 1439-00-00 1441-00-00 1442-00-00 1442-00-00 1444-00-00 1444-00-00 1445-00-00 1445-00-00 1446-00-00 1448-00-00 1448-00-00 1449-00-00 1451-00-00 1452-00-00 1454-00-00 1455-00-00 1455-00-00 1456-00-00 1456-00-00 1457-00-00 1458-00-00 1458-00-00 1459-00-00 1460-00-00

sum1
19 Rheingulden 30 Rheingulden 38 Rheingulden 10 Rheingulden 5 Rheingulden 100 Rheingulden 40 Rheingulden 200 Rheingulden 200 Rheingulden 500 Rheingulden 20 ducats 20 Rheingulden 1 Rheingulden 20 Rheingulden 1 Rheingulden 8 Rheingulden 1000 Rheingulden 10 Rheingulden 4 Rheingulden 20 Rheingulden 30 Rheingulden 10 Rheingulden 20 Rheingulden 20 Rheingulden 400 Rheingulden 30 Rheingulden 30 Rheingulden 100 Rheingulden 30 Rheingulden 20 ducats 300 Rheingulden 20 Rheingulden 41 ducats 220 Rheingulden 20 Rheingulden

sum2
£12½.6½s. lüb. £20½ lüb. £26.12s. lüb. £7.20d. lüb. £3½.20d. lüb. £72.20d. lüb. £29.6s. 8d. lüb. £146.13s.4d. lüb. £146.13s.4d. lüb. £375 lüb. £21.10s. lüb. £22 lüb. 23s. lüb. £21 lüb. 23s. lüb. £8.8s. lüb. £1050 lüb. £10.15s. lüb. £4.6s. lüb. £22 lüb. £33 lüb. £11 lüb. £23 lüb. £23 lüb. £460 lüb. £34.10s. lüb. £21 lüb. £115 lüb. £32.10s. lüb. £32.12s. lüb. £345 lüb. £23 lüb. £69.14s. lüb. £253 lüb. £23 lüb.

place
Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg
40

type Source
A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 19) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 19) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 20) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 21) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 23) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 22) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 26) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 29) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 29) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 36) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 40) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 64) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 71) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 72) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 71) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 74) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 75) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 76) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 76) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 78) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 79) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 79) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 80) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 88) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 89) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 91) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 93) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 92) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 93) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 94) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 94) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 96) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 95) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 97) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 101)

quantity Au quantity Ag ratio

61.7203 97.4531 123.4406 32.4844 16.2422 324.8438 129.9375 590.6250 555.4828 1388.7070 71.1938 55.5483
2.7774 55.5483
2.7774 22.2193 2777.4141 27.7741 11.1097 55.5483 83.3224 27.7741 55.5483 55.5483 1110.9656 83.3224 81.6886 272.2955 81.6886 71.1938 816.8865 54.4591 145.9474 599.0501 54.4591

688.6853 11.16 1100.8225 11.30 1345.9776 10.90
358.4213 11.03 181.3190 11.16 3647.4643 11.23 1486.8161 11.44 7421.4303 12.57 7421.4303 13.36 18975.2479 13.66 897.9609 12.61 677.0428 12.19
35.3909 12.74 632.9430 11.39
34.6612 12.48 253.1772 11.39 31647.1488 11.39 324.0065 11.67 129.6026 11.67 663.0831 11.94 994.6247 11.94 331.5416 11.94 693.2233 12.48 693.2233 12.48 13864.4652 12.48 1039.8349 12.48 632.9430 7.75 3466.1163 12.73 979.5546 11.99 982.5686 13.80 10398.3489 12.73 693.2233 12.73 2100.7679 14.39 7625.4559 12.73 693.2233 12.73

yyyy-mm-dd
1460-04-25 1461-00-00 1461-00-00 1461-00-00 1461-00-00 1461-00-00 1462-00-00 1462-00-00 1462-00-00 1463-00-00 1463-00-00 1463-00-00 1465-00-00 1465-09-29 1466-00-00 1466-00-00 1467-00-00 1468-00-00 1468-00-00 1468-00-00 1468-00-00 1469-00-00 1470-00-00 1471-00-00 1473-00-00 1473-00-00 1473-00-00 1473-10-15 1474-00-00 1474-00-00 1475-00-00 1475-00-00 1475-00-00 1475-00-00 1476-00-00

sum1
600 Rheingulden 20 Rheingulden 6 Rheingulden 11 Hungarian fl. 20 Rheingulden 1 Rheingulden 2 Rheingulden 21 Rheingulden 10 Rheingulden 1 Rheingulden 30 Rheingulden 1 noble 100 Rheingulden 20 Rheingulden 10 Rheingulden 20 Rheingulden 20 Rheingulden 7 Rheingulden 4 Rheingulden 100 Rheingulden 1 Rheingulden 20 Rheingulden 20 Rheingulden 20 Rheingulden 20 Rheingulden 4 Rheingulden 382½ Rheingulden 20 Rheingulden 20 Rheingulden 25 Rheingulden 36 florenis 1000 florenis 20 Rheingulden 135 Rheingulden 15 Rheingulden

sum2
£690 lüb. £23 lüb. £6.18s. lüb. £16.10s. lüb. £24 lüb. £1.4s. lüb. £2.4s. lüb. £24.3s. lüb. £11.10s. lüb. 23s. lüb. £34.10s. lüb. £3.4s. lüb. £115 lüb. £23 lüb. £11.10s. lüb. £23 lüb. £23 lüb. £8.1s. lüb. £4.12s. lüb. £115 lüb. £1.4s. lüb. £23 lüb. £23 lüb. £23 lüb. £24 lüb. £4.16s. lüb. £643 lüb. £24 lüb. £24 lüb. £30 lüb. £37.10s. lüb. £1200 lüb. £24 lüb. £163.4s. lüb. £18 lüb.

place
Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg
41

type Source
A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 103) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 128) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 127) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 127) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 128) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 128) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 161) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 159) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 161) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 180) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 194) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 195) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 246) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 263) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 300 f) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 301) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 340) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 377) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 377) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 378) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 383) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 414) A (Koppmann, 1873, p. 454) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 31) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 116) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 117) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 92) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 117) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 156) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 157) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 176) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 180) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 200) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 211) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 239)

quantity Au quantity Ag ratio

1633.7730 54.4591 16.3377 38.6121 54.4591 2.7230 5.4459 57.1821 27.2295 2.7230 81.6886 6.7919 269.6519 53.9304 26.9652 53.9304 53.9304 18.8756 10.7861 269.6519 2.6965 53.9304 53.9304 53.9304 53.9304 10.7861
1031.4183 53.9304 53.9304 67.4130
102.1935 2696.5185
53.9304 364.0300
40.4478

20796.6978 12.73 693.2233 12.73 207.9670 12.73 497.3123 12.88 723.3634 13.28 36.1682 13.28 55.1306 10.12 605.1839 10.58 288.1828 10.58 28.8183 10.58 864.5484 10.58 80.1900 11.81 2881.8281 10.69 576.3656 10.69 288.1828 10.69 576.3656 10.69 576.3656 10.69 204.6516 10.84 116.9438 10.84 2923.5938 10.84 30.5071 11.31 584.7188 10.84 584.7188 10.84 584.7188 10.84 610.1413 11.31 122.0283 11.31
16346.7024 15.85 610.1413 11.31 610.1413 11.31 762.6766 11.31 953.3458 9.33
30507.0652 11.31 610.1413 11.31
4148.9609 11.40 457.6060 11.31

yyyy-mm-dd
1476-00-00 1476-00-00 1476-00-00 1476-00-00 1476-00-00 1476-00-00 1477-00-00 1477-00-00 1477-00-00 1477-00-00 1478-00-00 1478-00-00 1478-00-00 1479-00-00 1479-00-00 1480-00-00 1480-00-00 1481-00-00 1481-00-00 1481-00-00 1482-00-00 1482-00-00 1482-00-00 1482-00-00 1482-00-00 1482-00-00 1483-00-00 1483-00-00 1483-00-00 1483-00-00 1484-00-00 1484-00-00 1485-00-00
1485-00-00

sum1
275 Rheingulden 60 Rheingulden 20 Rheingulden 6 Rheingulden 49½ ducats 131 ducats 15 Rheingulden 100 Rheingulden 60 Rheingulden 20 Rheingulden 1000 Rheingulden 30 Rheingulden 20 Rheingulden 20 Rheingulden 13 Rheingulden 12 Rheingulden 600 Rheingulden 200 Rheingulden 11 Rheingulden 6 Rheingulden 20 Rheingulden 3 Rheingulden 1200 Rheingulden 12 Rheingulden 1 Lübeck fl. 30 Hungarian fl. 20 Rheingulden 12 Rheingulden 1 Lübeck fl. 15 Rheingulden 445 Rheingulden 100 Rheingulden 1600 Rheingulden 400 florenis renensibus luneburgensibus

sum2
£330 lüb. £72 lüb. £24.10s. lüb. £7.7s. lüb. £84.3s. lüb. £223.4s. lüb. £18.7s.6d. lüb. £122.10s. lüb. £73 10s. lüb. £24.10s. lüb. £1200 lüb. £36.15s. lüb. £24.10s. lüb. £24 lüb. £15.12s. lüb. £14.8s. lüb. £720 lüb. £240 lüb. £13.4s. lüb. £7.4s. lüb. £24 lüb. £3.12s. lüb. £1440 lüb. £14.8s. lüb. £1.12s. lüb. £48 lüb. £24 lüb. £14.8s. lüb. £1.12s. lüb. £18.9s. lüb. £534 lüb. £120 lüb. £1920 lüb.
£480 lüb.

place
Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg
Hamburg
42

type Source
A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 243) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 243) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 242) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 243) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 243) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 243) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 281) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 264) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 269) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 284) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 304) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 322) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 323) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 361) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 362) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 401) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 378) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 421) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 421) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 440) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 8) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 8) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 20) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 16) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 479) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 467) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 44) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 44) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 51) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 51) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 487) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 74) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 503)
A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 504)

quantity Au quantity Ag ratio

741.5426 161.7911
53.9304 16.1791 176.2048 466.3196 40.4478 269.6519 161.7911 53.9304 2647.1642 79.4149 52.9433 52.9433 34.4131 31.7660 1588.2985 529.4328 29.1188 15.8830 52.9433
7.9415 3176.5971
31.7660 3.5233
105.3058 52.9433 31.7660 3.5233 39.7075
1177.9881 264.7164
4235.4627

8389.4429 11.31 1830.4239 11.31
622.8526 11.55 186.8558 11.55 2139.3079 12.14 5674.3141 12.17 467.1394 11.55 3114.2629 11.55 1868.5577 11.55 622.8526 11.55 30507.0652 11.52 934.2789 11.76 622.8526 11.76 610.1413 11.52 396.5918 11.52 366.0848 11.52 18304.2391 11.52 6101.4130 11.52 335.5777 11.52 183.0424 11.52 610.1413 11.52
91.5212 11.52 36608.4783 11.52
366.0848 11.52 40.6761 11.54
1220.2826 11.59 610.1413 11.52 366.0848 11.52 40.6761 11.54 469.0461 11.81
13575.6440 11.52 3050.7065 11.52
48811.3043 11.52

1058.8657 12202.8261 11.52

yyyy-mm-dd
1485-12-31 1485-12-31 1486-00-00 1486-00-00 1487-00-00 1488-00-00 1488-00-00 1488-00-00 1488-00-00 1488-00-00 1489-00-00 1489-00-00 1489-00-00 1490-00-00 1491-00-00 1492-00-00 1493-00-00 1493-00-00 1494-00-00 1494-06-28 1495-00-00 1495-00-00 1496-00-00 1496-00-00 1497-00-00 1497-00-00 1498-00-00 1499-00-00 1499-00-00 1500-00-00 1500-00-00 1500-00-00 1502-06-11 1505-06-25 1509-00-00

sum1
600 Rheingulden 1600 Rheingulden 10 Rheingulden 17 Rheingulden 1 Rheingulden 5 Rheingulden 6 aureis (Rheingulden) 100 aureis (Rheingulden) 2 Rheingulden 6 Rheingulden 1 Rheingulden 100 Rheingulden 1 Rheingulden 2 Rheingulden 20 Rheingulden 2 Rheingulden 1000 Rheingulden 15 Rheingulden 23 Rheingulden 1500 Rheingulden 59 Rheingulden 26 Rheingulden 10 Rheingulden 20 Rheingulden 6 Rheingulden 10 Rheingulden 36 Rheingulden 1500 ducats 150 ducats 4000 Rheingulden 80 Rheingulden 3 renenses - 3s. 540 Rheingulden 540 Rheingulden 500 Rheingulden

sum2
£720 lüb. £1920 lüb. £12 lüb. £20.8s. lüb. 24s. lüb. £6 lüb. £7.4s. lüb. £120 lüb. £2.8s. lüb. £7.4s. lüb. £1.4s. lüb. £120 lüb. 30s. lüb. £2. 8s. lüb. £24 lüb. £2.8s. lüb. £1200 lüb. £18 lüb. £27.12s. lüb. £1800 lüb. £70.16s. lüb. £31.4s. lüb. £12 lüb. £24 lüb. £7.4s. lüb. £12 lüb. £43.4s. lüb. £3022.12s. lüb. £322.12s. lüb. £4800 lüb. £96 lüb. £4.16s. lüb. £648 lüb. £648 lüb. £600 lüb.

place
Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg
43

type Source
C (Pitz, 1961, p. 42) C (Pitz, 1961, p. 42) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 124) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 131) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 146) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 170) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 163) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 539) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 162) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 163) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 183) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 550) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 183) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 209) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 228) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 248) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 597) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 268) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 278) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 277) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 299) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 299) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 323) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 330) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 353) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 360) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 381) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 630) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 425) A (Koppmann, 1878, p. 634) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 456) A (Koppmann, 1880, p. 455) A (Koppmann, 1883, p. 12) A (Koppmann, 1883, p. 39) A (Koppmann, 1883, p. 73)

quantity Au quantity Ag ratio
1588.2985 18304.2391 11.52 4235.4627 48811.3043 11.52
26.4716 305.0707 11.52 45.0018 518.6201 11.52
2.6472 30.5071 11.52 13.2358 152.5353 11.52 15.8830 183.0424 11.52 264.7164 3050.7065 11.52
5.2943 61.0141 11.52 15.8830 183.0424 11.52
2.5755 30.5071 11.84 257.5547 3050.7065 11.84
2.5755 38.1338 14.81 5.1511 61.0141 11.84 50.5481 610.1413 12.07 5.0548 61.0141 12.07 2527.4058 30507.0652 12.07 37.9111 457.6060 12.07 58.1303 701.6625 12.07 3791.1087 45760.5978 12.07 149.1169 1799.9168 12.07 65.7126 793.1837 12.07 25.2741 305.0707 12.07 50.5481 610.1413 12.07 15.1644 183.0424 12.07 25.2741 305.0707 12.07 90.9866 1098.2543 12.07 5339.5379 76842.2128 14.39 533.9538 8201.3160 15.36 10109.6232 122028.2609 12.07 202.1925 2440.5652 12.07 7.5822 118.2149 15.59 1364.7991 16263.3779 11.92 1364.7991 16263.3779 11.92 1263.7029 13704.3457 10.84

yyyy-mm-dd
1520-00-00 1522-00-00 1523-00-00 1523-00-00 1525-00-00 1526-00-00 1527-00-00 1528-00-00 1529-00-00 1529-00-00 1530-00-00 1531-00-00 1531-00-00 1531-00-00 1532-00-00 1532-00-00 1532-00-00 1533-00-00 1534-00-00 1535-00-00 1535-00-00 1535-00-00 1535-00-00 1536-00-00 1537-00-00 1539-00-00 1541-00-00 1541-00-00 1542-00-00 1553-00-00 1554-00-00 1554-00-00 1555-00-00 1555-00-00 1556-00-00

sum1
7000 Rheingulden 50 Rheingulden 2 Rheingulden 5 Rheingulden 200 floreni auri (Rheingulden) 50 Rheingulden 80 Rheingulden 50 Rheingulden 120 Rheingulden 50 Rheingulden 1 Rheingulden 41 Rheingulden 59 Rheingulden 17 Rheingulden (auri) 1 Rheingulden 200 Rheingulden 1 pecia aurea portugalie 50 Rheingulden 50 Rheingulden 30 Rheingulden 50 Rheingulden 20 Rheingulden 30 Rheingulden 50 Rheingulden 147 Rheingulden 50 Rheingulden 150 Rheingulden 100 Rheingulden (auri) 50 Rheingulden 4000 Rheingulden 1 Rheingulden 3000 Rheingulden 43 aurei justi ponderis renenses 20 aurei renenses 50 Rheingulden

sum2
£8400 lüb. £62.12s. lüb. £2.12s. lüb. £6.10s. lüb. £270 lüb. £70 lüb. £108 lüb. £70 lüb. £162 lüb. £70 lüb. 29s. lüb. 61m.8s. lüb. £85.6s. lüb. £24.16s. lüb. 24s. lüb. £240 lüb. 26m. lüb. £75.8s. lüb. £72.10s. lüb. £43 lüb. £75 lüb. £30 lüb. £45 lüb. £75 lüb. £220.10s. lüb. £80 lüb. £240 lüb. £160 lüb. £80 lüb. £6581.13s. lüb. 2m. lüb. £4817.10s. lüb. £70.19s. lüb. £34 lüb. £85 lüb.

place
Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg
44

type Source
A (Koppmann, 1883, p. 164) A (Koppmann, 1883, p. 200) A (Koppmann, 1883, p. 223) A (Koppmann, 1883, p. 219) A (Koppmann, 1883, p. 276) A (Koppmann, 1883, p. 304) A (Koppmann, 1883, p. 330) A (Koppmann, 1883, p. 355) A (Koppmann, 1883, p. 382) A (Koppmann, 1883, p. 382) A (Koppmann, 1883, p. 419) A (Koppmann, 1883, p. 432) A (Koppmann, 1883, p. 449) A (Koppmann, 1883, p. 443) A (Koppmann, 1883, p. 484) A (Koppmann, 1883, p. 484) A (Koppmann, 1883, p. 455) A (Koppmann, 1883, p. 510) A (Koppmann, 1883, p. 543) A (Koppmann, 1883, p. 578) A (Koppmann, 1883, p. 578) A (Koppmann, 1883, p. 587) A (Koppmann, 1883, p. 587) A (Koppmann, 1883, p. 615) A (Koppmann, 1883, p. 656) A (Koppmann, 1883, p. 736) A (Koppmann, 1892, p. 29) A (Koppmann, 1892, p. 28) A (Koppmann, 1892, p. 70) A (Koppmann, 1892, p. 505) A (Koppmann, 1892, p. 574) A (Koppmann, 1892, p. 540) A (Koppmann, 1894, p. 7) A (Koppmann, 1894, p. 7) A (Koppmann, 1894, p. 76)

quantity Au quantity Ag ratio
17691.8407 185465.4785 10.48 126.3703 1382.1594 10.94 5.0548 57.4060 11.36 12.6370 143.5150 11.36 505.4812 5961.3904 11.79 126.3703 1545.5457 12.23 202.1925 2384.5562 11.79 126.3703 1545.5457 12.23 303.2887 3576.8342 11.79 126.3703 1545.5457 12.23 2.5274 32.0149 12.67 103.6236 1086.2978 10.48 149.1169 1883.3578 12.63 42.9659 547.5647 12.74 2.5274 26.4951 10.48 505.4812 5299.0137 10.48 35.1000 459.2479 13.08 126.3703 1664.7735 13.17 126.3703 1600.7437 12.67 75.8222 949.4066 12.52 126.3703 1655.9418 13.10 50.5481 662.3767 13.10 75.8222 993.5651 13.10 126.3703 1655.9418 13.10 371.5287 4868.4688 13.10 126.3703 1766.3379 13.98 379.1109 5299.0137 13.98 252.7406 3532.6758 13.98 126.3703 1766.3379 13.98
10109.6232 144760.9493 14.32 2.5274 35.1914 13.92
7582.2174 105959.1248 13.97 108.6784 1560.5189 14.36 50.5481 747.8174 14.79 126.3703 1869.5435 14.79

yyyy-mm-dd
1557-00-00 1557-00-00 1558-00-00 1560-00-00 1562-00-00 1562-00-00 1562-00-00

sum1
50 Rheingulden 20 Rheingulden 50 Rheingulden 50 Rheingulden 50 Rheingulden 1100 Rheingulden (in auro) 500 Rheingulden

sum2
£85 lüb. £34 lüb. £86.5s. lüb. £87.10s. lüb. £88.15s. lüb. £1980 lüb. £900 lüb.

Other places (for Cologne see Metz, 1990, pp. 366 ff.)

yyyy-mm-dd
1474-05-17 1475-06-23 1495-03-07 1380-00-00 1492-12-10 1493-03-00 1493-03-12 1493-10-10 1493-11-00 1493-11-00 1493-12-11 1494-06-00 1494-06-00 1495-00-00 1495-09-00 1495-10-02 1495-11-00 1495-12-00 1495-12-00 1496-04-00 1496-11-00 1496-12-00

sum1
1 Rheingulden 1 Rheingulden 1 gouden gulden (Rheingulden) 1 floren 1 ducat 2880 croonen 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 Hungarian fl. 1 Rheingulden 1 ducat 1 Hungarian fl. 1 Rheingulden 1 Rheingulden 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 Rheingulden 1 Hungarian fl. 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat

sum2
22 stuvers 40 grote 24 stuvers 28gr. 9 miten flem. 74 grote £620 grote 73 grote 82 grote 72 grote 54 grote 73 grote 72 grote 54 grote 56 grote 82 grote 49 grote 54 grote 62 grote 72 grote 80 grote 68 grote 72 grote

place
Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg Hamburg

type Source
A (Koppmann, 1894, p. 124) A (Koppmann, 1894, p. 125) A (Koppmann, 1894, p. 174) A (Koppmann, 1894, p. 271) A (Koppmann, 1894, p. 368) A (Koppmann, 1894, p. 343) A (Koppmann, 1894, p. 343)

place
Amsterdam Amsterdam Amsterdam Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp

type source
C (Stein, 1907, p. 210) C (Stein, 1907, p. 269) C (Stein, 1916, p. 528) H (Spufford, 1986, p. 215) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) C (Stein, 1916, p. 418) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) A (Spufford, 1986, p. 224) A (Spufford, 1986, p. 255) A (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) A (Spufford, 1986, p. 224) A (Spufford, 1986, p. 255) C (Spufford, 1986, p. 255) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) C (Spufford, 1986, p. 255) A (Spufford, 1986, p. 224) ? (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) A (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) A (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) A (Spufford, 1986, p. 223)

45

quantity Au quantity Ag ratio

126.3703 50.5481
126.3703 125.2002 125.2002 2754.4043 1252.0020

1869.5435 14.79 747.8174 14.79
1897.0367 15.01 1924.5300 15.37 1952.0233 15.59 43549.3652 15.81 19795.1660 15.81

quantity Au quantity Ag ratio

2.6965 2.6965 2.5755 3.4811 3.5597 9433.1847 3.5597 3.5597 3.5102 2.5274 3.5597 3.5102 2.5274 2.5274 3.5597 3.5597 2.5274 3.5102 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597

31.8613 11.82 27.5074 10.20 28.7945 11.18 31.4963 9.05 44.3915 12.47 89262.8588 9.46 43.7916 12.30 48.2907 13.57 43.1917 12.30 32.3938 12.82 43.7916 12.30 43.1917 12.30 32.3938 12.82 33.5935 13.29 49.1906 13.82 29.3944 8.26 32.3938 12.82 37.1929 10.60 43.1917 12.13 41.5476 11.67 35.3154 9.92 37.3928 10.50

yyyy-mm-dd
1497-01-10 1497-05-26 1497-06-00 1497-12-16 1498-01-00 1498-02-00 1498-06-00 1498-07-18 1498-11-00 1499-08-00 1499-10-10 1500-12-00 1558-00-00 1558-00-00 1558-00-00 1558-00-00 1558-06-00 1370-08-28 1370-08-28 1370-08-28 1384-08-28 1384-09-29 1385-00-00 1386-00-00 1387-00-00 1460-10-15 1460-10-23 1461-01-26 1461-01-30 1461-02-05 1461-02-23 1461-03-12 1461-03-17 1461-03-30 1461-07-24

sum1
1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 Hungarian fl. 1 Rheingulden 1 Hungarian fl. 1 Rheingulden 1 ducat 1 floren 1 ducat 1 floren 1 floren 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 floren 1 floren 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat

sum2
68 grote 68 grote 64 grote 68 grote 80 grote 84 grote 68 grote 80 grote 79 grote 79 grote 68 grote 75 grote 79 grote flem. 57 grote flem. 82 grote flem. 60 grote flem. 70 3/4 grote 31gr. 4 miten flem. 32gr. 4 miten flem. 32 grote 35gr. 12 miten flem. 36gr. Flem. 42gr. Flem. 34 grote 34 grote 54 grote 53gr. 12 miten flem. 53gr. 18 miten flem. 54gr. 6 miten flem. 54gr. 8 miten flem. 54gr. 14 miten flem. 57 grote 54gr. 8 miten flem. 57gr. 12 miten flem. 56gr. 12 miten flem.

place
Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Antwerp Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges
46

type source
A (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) A (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) A (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) A (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) C (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) A (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) A (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) C (Kellenbenz, 1974, p. 193) C (Kellenbenz, 1974, p. 193) C (Kellenbenz, 1974, p. 193) C (Kellenbenz, 1974, p. 193) B (Denzel, 1994, p. 110) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 215) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 217) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 215) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 215) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 217) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 217) C (Spufford, 1986, p. 215) C (Spufford, 1986, p. 215) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 222) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 222) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 222) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 222) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 222) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 222) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 222) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 222) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 222) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 222)

quantity Au quantity Ag ratio

3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5102 2.5274 3.5102 2.5274 3.5597 3.4811 3.5597 3.4811 3.4811 3.5597 3.5597 3.4811 3.4811 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597

35.3154 9.92 35.3154 9.92 33.2381 9.34 35.3154 9.92 41.5476 11.67 43.6250 12.26 35.3154 9.92 41.5476 11.67 41.0282 11.53 41.0282 11.53 35.3154 9.92 38.9509 10.94 35.8333 10.21 25.8544 10.23 37.1941 10.60 27.2152 10.77 32.0912 9.02 37.0883 10.65 38.2783 10.75 38.0800 10.94 43.4437 12.48 44.0555 12.38 51.3981 14.44 40.0077 11.49 36.4983 10.48 45.8912 12.89 45.4663 12.77 45.6787 12.83 46.1036 12.95 46.1745 12.97 46.3869 13.03 48.4407 13.61 46.1745 12.97 48.8656 13.73 48.0158 13.49

yyyy-mm-dd
1461-07-31 1462-03-30 1463-00-00
1463-03-12 1463-03-22 1463-04-05 1463-05-20 1463-08-19 1463-10-04 1463-10-19 1463-12-05 1464-02-20 1465-03-03 1467-07-31 1467-08-13 1493-06-07 1495-05-00 1495-05-06 1496-03-00 1496-05-06 1496-05-06 1497-06-00 1498-05-00 1499-05-06 1500-01-00 1500-08-00 1385-05-17 1385-05-17 1468-00-00 1485-00-00 1485-00-00 1486-00-00 1491-11-19 1491-11-19

sum1
1 ducat 1 ducat 1 noble

sum2
54gr. 16 miten flem. 55 grote 8s. grote

1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 floren 1 crown 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 182 Rheingulden (golden gulden) 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 40 noble 80 noble 14 noble 31 Rheingulden 7 Rheingulden 182 Rheingulden 1 Lübeck fl. 1 Hungarian fl.

54 grote 54gr. 12 miten flem. 54gr. 14 miten flem. 54gr. 12 miten flem. 54gr. 9 miten flem. 54gr. 6 miten flem. 54gr. 14 miten flem. 54gr. 20 miten flem. 53 grote 55 grote 34gr. 8 miten flem. 4s. grote 80gr. 12 miten flem. 84 grote 82 grote 82 grote 68 grote £41.7s. grote 80 grote 80 grote 80 grote 79 grote 79 grote 42½m. pr. 85m. pr. £5.9s. sterl. 46m. ­ 4sc. pr. 10½m. pr. 225m. pr. 2m. pr. 2m. pr.

place
Bruges Bruges Bruges
Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Bruges Danzig Danzig Danzig Danzig Danzig Danzig Danzig Danzig
47

type source
B (Spufford, 1986, p. 222) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 222) C (Gilliodts-van Severen, 1885, p.
206) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 222) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 222) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 222) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 222) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 222) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 222) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 222) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 222) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 222) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 222) C (Spufford, 1986, p. 217) C (Stein, 1903, p. 250) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) A (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) A (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) C (Schäfer, 1888, p. 485) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) A (Spufford, 1986, p. 223) A (Hanserecesse, 1875, p. 194) A (Hanserecesse, 1875, p. 194) C (Stein, 1903, p. 419) A (Posthumus, 1953, p. 312) A (Posthumus, 1953, p. 311) A (Posthumus, 1953, p. 313) C (Górski and Biskup, 1957, p. 369) C (Górski and Biskup, 1957, p. 369)

quantity Au quantity Ag ratio

3.5597 3.5597 6.7919

46.4577 13.05 46.7410 13.13 81.5843 12.01

3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.4532 3.4965 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 459.9879 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 301.8600 603.7200 95.0859 83.5921 18.8756 490.7664 3.5233 3.5102

45.8912 12.89 46.3161 13.01 46.3869 13.03 46.3161 13.01 46.2099 12.98 46.1036 12.95 46.3869 13.03 46.5994 13.09 45.0414 12.65 46.7410 13.13 25.4642 7.37 35.6004 10.18 48.2907 13.57 50.3903 14.16 49.1906 13.82 42.5863 11.96 35.3154 9.92 5153.9769 11.20 41.5476 11.67 41.5476 11.67 41.0282 11.53 41.0282 11.53 41.0282 11.53 3323.1135 11.01 6646.2270 11.01 945.0183 9.94 741.1570 8.87 169.7923 9.00 3638.4073 7.41 39.5903 11.24 39.5903 11.28

yyyy-mm-dd sum1
1491-11-19 1 engeler 1558-00-00 1 Rheingulden 1483-08-26 1 Rheingulden 1350-00-00 (c.) 180 florens

1350-00-00 (c.) 90 florens

1471-06-12 1385-04-08 1467-02-17 1476-05-05 1477-06-17 1480-09-07 1481-07-31 1374-12-13 1374-12-13 1461-01-08 1461-01-15 1467-06-19
1529-07-28
1529-07-28
1529-11-06
1529-11-06
1529-11-06
1530-03-25
1531-00-00 1531-00-00 1532-00-00

1 Rheingulden 1 noble 1 Hungarian fl. 1 Hungarian fl. 1 Hungarian fl. 1 Hungarian fl. 1 Hungarian fl. 1 alder schild 1 noble 200 Rheingulden 200 Rheingulden 4 Hungarian fl.
1 Rheingulden
1 Hungarian fl.
1 Horn fl.
1 Rheingulden
1 Hungarian fl.
1 Rheingulden
1 Rheingulden 1 Hungarian fl. 1 Rheingulden

sum2
3m. pr. 33 gr. pr. 20 stuvere flem. 100m. lüb.
50m. lüb.
20 st. (= stuivers flem.) 1m. pr. 7f. pr. 36gr. pr. 38gr. pr. 36gr. pr. 36gr. 2s. pr. ½m. pr. 1m. pr. 300m. pr. 300m. pr. 7m. pr.
2m. pr.
3m. pr.
20sc. pr.
2m. pr.
3m. pr.
30gr. pr.
90s. pr. 135s. pr. 84s. pr.

place
Danzig Danzig Deventer Doberan
Doberan
Dordrecht Elbing Elbing Gnesen Gnesen Gnesen Gnesen Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg
Königsberg
Königsberg
Königsberg
Königsberg
Königsberg
Königsberg
Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg

type source

quantity Au quantity Ag ratio

C (Górski and Biskup, 1957, p. 369)

5.0310 59.3855 11.80

C (Kellenbenz, 1974, p. 246)

2.5274 25.3333 10.02

C (Stein, 1907, p. 665)

2.6472 23.6030 8.92

C (Verein für meklenburgische

313.3028 3226.9271 10.30

Geschichte und Alterthumskunde,

1875, p. 722)

C (Verein für meklenburgische

313.3028 3226.9271 10.30

Geschichte und Alterthumskunde,

1875, p. 722)

C (Stein, 1907, p. 17)

2.6965 28.9649 10.74

C (Voigt, 1853, p. 34)

7.5465 78.1909 10.36

C (Töppen, 1886, p. 223)

3.5102 37.2659 10.62

A (Woehlky, 1885, p. 564)

3.5102 35.7581 10.19

A (Woehlky, 1885, p. 564)

3.5102 30.7243 8.75

A (Woehlky, 1885, p. 565)

3.5102 29.1073 8.29

A (Woehlky, 1885, p. 565)

3.5102 29.6463 8.45

A (Ziesemer, 1921, p. 2)

3.7771 43.5813 11.54

A (Ziesemer, 1921, p. 2)

7.5465 87.1626 11.55

B (Stein, 1898, p. 112)

555.4828 6388.4399 11.50

B (Stein, 1898, p. 113)

555.4828 6388.4399 11.50

A (GStAPK, XX HA, OBA 16118, fol. 14.0408 149.0636 10.62

2v)

C (GStAPK, XX HA, Ostpr.Fol. 1133,

2.5274 30.4000 12.03

fol. 146 r.)

C (GStAPK, XX HA, Ostpr.Fol. 1133,

3.5102 45.6000 12.99

fol. 146 r.)

C (GStAPK, XX HA, Ostpr.Fol. 998,

1.2670 12.6667 10.00

fol. 204 r.)

C (GStAPK, XX HA, Ostpr.Fol. 998,

2.5274 30.4000 12.03

fol. 204 r.)

C (GStAPK, XX HA, Ostpr.Fol. 998,

3.5102 45.6000 12.99

fol. 204 r.)

C (GStAPK, XX HA, Ostpr.Fol. 913,

2.5274 22.8000 9.02

fol. 137 r.)

H (Volckart, 1996, p. 441)

2.5274 22.8000 9.02

H (Volckart, 1996, p. 441)

3.5102 34.2000 9.74

H (Volckart, 1996, p. 441)

2.5274 21.2800 8.42

48

yyyy-mm-dd
1534-00-00 1536-00-00 1536-00-00 1536-00-00 1537-00-00 1538-00-00 1540-00-00 1540-00-00 1540-00-00 1541-00-00 1541-00-00 1541-00-00 1542-00-00 1542-00-00 1542-00-00 1542-00-00 1543-00-00 1543-00-00 1544-00-00 1544-00-00 1545-00-00 1548-00-00 1548-00-00 1548-00-00 1550-00-00 1550-00-00 1550-00-00 1551-00-00 1552-00-00 1553-00-00 1554-00-00 1554-00-00 1554-00-00 1555-00-00 1555-00-00

sum1
1 Hungarian fl. 1 Horn fl. 1 Horn fl. 1 Hungarian fl. 1 Hungarian fl. 1 Hungarian fl. 1 Rheingulden 1 Hungarian fl. 1 Hungarian fl. 1 Horn fl. 1 Hungarian fl. 1 Hungarian fl. 1 Horn fl. 1 Rheingulden 1 Hungarian fl. 1 Hungarian fl. 1 Rheingulden 1 Hungarian fl. 1 Horn fl. 1 Hungarian fl. 1 Hungarian fl. 1 Rheingulden 1 Hungarian fl. 1 Hungarian fl. 1 Horn fl. 1 Rheingulden 1 Hungarian fl. 1 Hungarian fl. 1 Hungarian fl. 1 Hungarian fl. 1 Horn fl. 1 Rheingulden 1 Hungarian fl. 1 Rheingulden 1 Hungarian fl.

sum2
180s. pr. 37s. pr. 38s. pr. 135s. pr. 135s. pr. 135s. pr. 96s. pr. 136s. pr. 137s. pr. 39s. pr. 136s. pr. 137s. pr. 38s.2d. pr. 96s. pr. 139s. pr. 140s. pr. 90s. pr. 141s. pr. 42s. pr. 144s. pr. 144s. pr. 105s. pr. 157s. pr. 158s. pr. 45s. pr. 108s. pr. 156s. pr. 159s. pr. 156s. pr. 153s. pr. 50s. pr. 105s. pr. 156s. pr. 105s. pr. 153s. pr.

place
Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg

type source
H (Volckart, 1996, p. 441) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 441) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 441) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 441) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 441) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 441) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 441) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 441) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 441) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 441) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 441) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 441) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 441) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 441) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 441) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 441) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 441) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 441) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 441) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 441) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 441) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 442) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 441) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 442) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 442) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 442) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 442) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 442) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 442) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 442) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 442) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 442) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 442) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 442) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 442)

49

quantity Au quantity Ag ratio

3.5102 1.2670 1.2670 3.5102 3.5102 3.5102 2.5274 3.5102 3.5102 1.2670 3.5102 3.5102 1.2670 2.5274 3.5102 3.5102 2.5274 3.5102 1.2670 3.5102 3.5102 2.5274 3.5102 3.5102 1.2670 2.5274 3.5102 3.5102 3.5102 3.5102 1.2670 2.5274 3.5102 2.5274 3.5102

45.6000 12.99 9.3733 7.40 9.6267 7.60 34.2000 9.74 34.2000 9.74 34.2000 9.74 24.3200 9.62 34.4533 9.82 34.7067 9.89 9.8800 7.80 34.4533 9.82 34.7067 9.89 9.7111 7.66 24.3200 9.62 35.2133 10.03 35.4667 10.10 22.8000 9.02 35.7200 10.18 10.6400 8.40 36.4800 10.39 36.4800 10.39 26.6000 10.52 39.7733 11.33 40.0267 11.40 11.4000 9.00 27.3600 10.83 39.5200 11.26 40.2800 11.48 39.5200 11.26 38.7600 11.04 11.4000 9.00 26.6000 10.52 39.5200 11.26 26.6000 10.52 38.7600 11.04

yyyy-mm-dd
1556-00-00 1556-00-00 1557-00-00 1561-01-27 1380-10-13 1382-02-21 1460-01-11 1460-09-30 1461-02-09 1461-03-20 1461-04-13 1461-08-19 1462-02-04 1462-09-09 1463-01-11 1463-03-04 1463-04-04 1463-04-04 1463-10-22 1466-04-29 1466-07-29 1468-09-05 1469-04-23 1469-06-27 1471-04-09 1471-10-21 1473-08-11 1475-10-23 1475-11-21 1475-11-21 1476-05-29 1476-05-31 1477-04-22 1478-01-23 1481-07-31

sum1
1 Hungarian fl. 1 Rheingulden 1 Hungarian fl. 1200 Hungarian fl. 1 floren 1 floren 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 noble (old) 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 2 noble 1 real 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat 1 ducat

sum2
153s. pr. 115s. pr. 156s. pr. 3700 taler 3s. 3s. 3s.11d. 3s.7d. 3s.7d. 3s.11d. 3s.6d. 3s.7d. 3s.8d. 3s.7d. 3s.5d. 3s.7d. 3s.7d. 3s.11d. 3s.8d. 4s.2d. 3s.10d. 4s.1d. 8s.4d. sterl. (nyes geldes) 4s.1d. 4s.2d. 4s.2d. 4s. 2d. 4s.3d. 13s.4d. sterl. 10s. sterl. 4s.3d. 4s.8d. 4s.4d. 4s. 12m. 4s.3d.

place
Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg Königsberg London London London London London London London London London London London London London London London London London London London London London London London London London London London London London London London

type source
H (Volckart, 1996, p. 442) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 442) H (Volckart, 1996, p. 442) H (Lohmeyer, 1893, p. 237) C (Spufford, 1986, p. 201) C (Spufford, 1986, p. 201) C (Spufford, 1986, p. 205) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 205) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 205) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 205) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 205) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 205) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 205) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 205) C (Spufford, 1986, p. 205) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 205) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 205) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 205) B (Spufford, 1986, p. 205) C (Spufford, 1986, p. 205) C (Spufford, 1986, p. 205) C (Spufford, 1986, p. 205) A (Stein, 1903, p. 535) C (Spufford, 1986, p. 205) C (Spufford, 1986, p. 205) C (Spufford, 1986, p. 205) C (Spufford, 1986, p. 205) C (Spufford, 1986, p. 206) A (Schäfer, 1881, p. 291) A (Schäfer, 1881, p. 291) C (Spufford, 1986, p. 206) C (Spufford, 1986, p. 206) C (Spufford, 1986, p. 206) M (Spufford, 1986, p. 206) C (Spufford, 1986, p. 206)

50

quantity Au quantity Ag ratio

3.5102 2.5274 3.5102 4212.2329 3.4811 3.4811 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 6.7919 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 13.5837 7.5465 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597 3.5597

38.7600 11.04 29.1333 11.53 39.5200 11.26 97643.0000 23.18 38.8411 11.16 38.8411 11.16 42.2577 11.87 38.6613 10.86 39.3356 11.05 42.2577 11.87 38.0619 10.69 39.1109 10.99 39.7852 11.18 39.3356 11.05 37.1628 10.44 38.6613 10.86 38.6613 10.86 42.2577 11.87 39.5604 11.11 35.9640 10.10 33.4465 9.40 35.2447 9.90 71.9280 10.59 35.7842 10.05 35.9640 10.10 36.5035 10.25 35.9640 10.10 37.0486 10.41 115.0848 8.47 86.3136 11.44 37.0486 10.41 40.2797 11.32 37.7622 10.61 34.8851 9.80 37.2313 10.46

yyyy-mm-dd
1497-12-18 1350-00-00
1350-00-00
1370-01-07
1371-07-25 1378-00-00 1463-02-09 1468-00-00 1472-00-00 1472-00-00 1472-01-25 1476-00-00 1491-09-16 1475-09-21 1461-08-31
1477-00-00
1479-00-00
1480-00-00
1480-00-00
1481-00-00
1482-09-08 1494-00-00
1466-11-07 1471-12-20 1490-00-00 1491-00-00 1499-02-02

sum1
1 ducat 1 Lübeck fl.
1 Lübeck fl.
16 Lübeck fl.
1 noble 1 Lübeck fl. 1 Rheingulden 1 Lübeck fl. 1 Lübeck fl. 1 Lübeck fl. 1 ducat 1 Lübeck fl. 180 Rheingulden 5 Rheingulden 1 gulden
8 Hungarian fl.
2 nye collnsche gulden
4 Rheingulden
3 Rheingulden
3 Rheingulden
3 Rheingulden 5 Hungarian fl.
2500 Hungarian fl. 1 Hungarian fl. 1 gouwen gulden (Rheingulden) 22 gulden (Rheingulden) 10 Hungarian fl.

sum2
4s.4d. 9s. lüb.
10s. lüb.
10m. lüb.
21s.6d. lüb. 12s. lüb. 23s. lüb. 2m. lüb. 2m. lüb. 34s.6d. lüb. 35½s. lüb. 34s. lüb. 307½m. lüb. 10m. lüb. 23s. lüb.
16m. lüb.
3m. lüb.
6m. lüb.
4½m. lüb.
4½m. lüb.
4½m. lüb. 10m. lüb.
4000m. pr. 7f. pr. 3s. 4 grote flem. £3.13s. 4 grote 20m. pr.

place
London Lübeck
Lübeck
Lübeck
Lübeck Lübeck Lübeck Lübeck Lübeck Lübeck Lübeck Lübeck Lübeck Lund Lüneburg
Lüneburg
Lüneburg
Lüneburg
Lüneburg
Lüneburg
Lüneburg Lüneburg
Marienburg Marienburg Middelburg Middelburg Poznan

type source

quantity Au quantity Ag ratio

C (Spufford, 1986, p. 206)

3.5597 37.4026 10.51

C (Verein für Lübeckische Geschichte

3.5688 36.3029 10.17

und Alterthumskunde, 1871, p. 189)

C (Verein für Lübeckische Geschichte

3.5688 40.3366 11.30

und Alterthumskunde, 1871, p. 189)

L (Verein für Lübeckische Geschichte

54.6762 615.4934 11.26

und Alterthumskunde, 1871, p. 773)

M (Dittmer, 1860, p. 46)

7.5465 82.7069 10.96

C (Pauli, 1847, p. 229)

3.4173 38.8560 11.37

C (Ropp, 1888, p. 207)

2.7774 29.0954 10.48

H (Jesse, 1928, p. 218)

3.5233 45.0450 12.78

H (Jesse, 1928, p. 218)

3.5233 40.6761 11.54

H (Jesse, 1928, p. 218)

3.5233 43.8539 12.45

B (Pauli, 1872, p. 140)

3.5597 45.1250 12.68

H (Jesse, 1928, p. 218)

3.5233 43.2183 12.27

C (Schäfer, 1888, p. 8)

463.5984 6253.9484 13.49

C (Stein, 1907, p. 285)

13.4826 203.3804 15.08

C (Verein für Lübeckische Geschichte

2.7774 34.6612 12.48

und Alterthumskunde, 1898, p. 88)

A (StA Lüneburg, AB 56,1, S. 412, Z.

28.0816 325.4087 11.59

10)

A (StA Lüneburg, AB 56,1, S. 444, Z.

5.2943 61.0141 11.52

10)

A (StA Lüneburg, AB 56,2, S. 6, Z.

10.5887 122.0283 11.52

20)

A (StA Lüneburg, AB 56,2, S. 22, Z.

7.9415 91.5212 11.52

15)

A (StA Lüneburg, AB 56,2, S. 35, Z.

7.9415 91.5212 11.52

34)

A (Stein, 1907, p. 596)

7.9415 91.5212 11.52

A (StA Lüneburg, AB 56,2, S. 310, Z.

17.5510 203.3804 11.59

8)

C (Thunert, 1896, p. 3)

8775.4852 85179.1992 9.71

C (Thunert, 1896, p. 163)

3.5102 34.8981 9.94

A (Stein, 1916, p. 252)

2.5755 29.7721 11.56

A (Stein, 1916, p. 253)

56.6620 654.9853 11.56

C (Stein, 1916, p. 687)

35.1019 395.9033 11.28

51

yyyy-mm-dd 1491-12-13 1491-12-13 1460-02-08
1461-02-27
1465-03-18
1469-03-22
1471-00-00
1474-01-21
1474-05-29
1475-06-12
1485-02-28
1497-12-05

sum1 2 Hungarian fl. 2 Rheingulden 1 Hungarian fl.
1 gulden (Hungarian fl.)
14 gulden (Hungarian fl.)
20 Hungarian fl.
6 gulden (Hungarian fl.)
2 gulden (Hungarian fl.)
2 gulden (Hungarian fl.)
1 Hungarian fl.
3 Hungarian fl.
193 Hungarian fl. ­ 1 ort

sum2

place

4m. pr.

Stuhm

3m. pr.

Stuhm

1½m.6s. pr. (geringes geldis) Thorn

2m. ­ 8s. pr.

Thorn

26½m.4sc. pr.

Thorn

35m. pr.

Thorn

11m. pr.

Thorn

3½m. pr.

Thorn

3½m. pr.

Thorn

2m. pr.

Thorn

6m. pr.

Thorn

385½m. pr.

Thorn

type source

quantity Au quantity Ag ratio

C (Górski and Biskup, 1957, p. 396)
C (Górski and Biskup, 1957, p. 396)
L (Ciesielska and Janosz-Biskupowa, 1964, p. 130)
L (Ciesielska and Janosz-Biskupowa, 1964, p. 41)
L (Ciesielska and Janosz-Biskupowa, 1964, p. 105)
L (Ciesielska and Janosz-Biskupowa, 1964, p. 205)
L (Ciesielska and Janosz-Biskupowa, 1964, p. 197)
L (Ciesielska and Janosz-Biskupowa, 1964, p. 41)
L (Ciesielska and Janosz-Biskupowa, 1964, p. 148)
L (Ciesielska and Janosz-Biskupowa, 1964, p. 79)
L (Ciesielska and Janosz-Biskupowa, 1964, p. 31)
L (Ciesielska and Janosz-Biskupowa, 1964, p. 241 f)

7.0204 5.1511 3.5102

79.1807 11.28 59.3855 11.53 34.0717 9.71

3.5102 39.7503 11.32

49.1427 567.8613 11.56

70.2039 695.2964 9.90

21.0612 219.3598 10.42

7.0204 69.7963 9.94

7.0204 69.7963 9.94

3.5102 39.8836 11.36

10.5306 97.0242 9.21

676.5899 7631.0365 11.28

52

3. Monetary standards Source type: A = modern analysis, CA = contemporary assay, H = historian, MA = mint account, MC = mint master contract, O = ordinance. Gold

yyyy-mm-dd
1484-00-00 1342-02-18 1351-12-09 1365-08-15 1365-08-29 1439-02-04 1492-05-24 1349-05-06 1354-12-20 1361-09-16 1361-09-16 1364-02-10 1371-06-18 1380-01-30 1381-04-28 1383-09-07 1388-10-00 1409-08-00 1409-08-00 1416-12-00 1425-06-00 1427-09-00 1428-11-00 1487-12-20 1344-07-09 1346-07-28

coin
Horngulden Lübeck fl. Lübeck fl. Lübeck fl. Lübeck fl. Lübeck fl. Lübeck fl. Écu Écu Écu Franc Lion Écu Écu Écu Écu Noble Écu Noble Noble Noble Noble Noble Noble Noble Noble

authority
bishop of Liège city of Lübeck city of Lübeck city of Lübeck city of Lübeck city of Lübeck city of Lübeck count of Flanders count of Flanders count of Flanders count of Flanders count of Flanders count of Flanders count of Flanders count of Flanders count of Flanders count of Flanders count of Flanders count of Flanders count of Flanders count of Flanders count of Flanders count of Flanders count of Flanders king of England king of England

unit of taille fineness weight gold source source

weight

content type

239.112 239.112 239.112 239.112 233.888 233.888 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 349.920 349.920

67.00 68.50 69.00 69.00 65.00 65.00 54.00 54.33 53.00 63.33 45.25 54.50 54.50 54.50 54.50 31.67 54.00 31.67 36.00 35.50 35.25 35.25 33.00 39.50 42.00

1.2670 H (Schrötter, 1930, p. 275) 1.0000 3.5688 3.5688 MA (Dittmer, 1860, p. 62) 1.0000 3.4907 3.4907 MA (Dittmer, 1860, p. 77) 1.0000 3.4654 3.4654 MA (Dittmer, 1860, p. 77) 0.9861 3.4654 3.4173 MA (Dittmer, 1860, p. 77) 0.9792 3.5983 3.5233 CA (Ropp, 1878, p. 223 f.) 1.0000 3.5983 3.5983 O (Schäfer, 1888, p. 71) 0.9688 4.5325 4.3908 H (Blockmans and Blockmans, 1979, p. 86) 0.9271 4.5047 4.1762 H (Blockmans and Blockmans, 1979, p. 86) 0.8958 4.6180 4.1369 H (Blockmans and Blockmans, 1979, p. 87) 1.0000 3.8645 3.8645 H (Blockmans and Blockmans, 1979, p. 87) 1.0000 5.4089 5.4089 H (Blockmans and Blockmans, 1979, p. 87 f.) 1.0000 4.4909 4.4909 H (Blockmans and Blockmans, 1979, p. 88) 0.9792 4.4909 4.3973 H (Blockmans and Blockmans, 1979, p. 88) 0.9583 4.4909 4.3038 H (Blockmans and Blockmans, 1979, p. 88) 0.8958 4.4909 4.0231 H (Blockmans and Blockmans, 1979, p. 88) 0.9896 7.7290 7.6485 H (Munro, 1972, p. 209) 0.9896 4.5325 4.4852 H (Munro, 1972, p. 209) 0.9896 7.7290 7.6485 H (Munro, 1972, p. 209) 0.9896 6.7987 6.7279 H (Munro, 1972, p. 209) 0.9792 6.8945 6.7508 H (Munro, 1972, p. 209) 0.9948 6.9433 6.9072 H (Munro, 1972, p. 209) 0.9792 6.9433 6.7987 H (Munro, 1972, p. 209) 1.0000 7.4168 7.4168 H (Pusch, 1932, p. 81) 1.0000 8.8587 8.8587 H (Challis, 1992, p. 701) 1.0000 8.3314 8.3314 H (Challis, 1992, p. 701)

53

yyyy-mm-dd
1349-01-27 1351-06-20 1409-00-00 1413-04-14 1464-08-13 1465-03-06 1465-03-06 1266-08-15 1337-01-00 1340-01-29 1343-04-10 1349-05-06 1351-07-25 1360-03-15 1360-12-05 1365-04-20 1385-03-11 1389-09-11 1419-03-07 1420-12-19 1423-01-00 1423-11-00 1424-08-00 1429-01-00 1436-01-28 1474-01-04 1494-08-13 1519-05-18 1519-07-21 1561-08-30 1325-00-00 1342 to 1382 1387 to 1437 1452 to 1457

coin authority

Noble Noble Noble Noble Noble New noble (rosenoble, ryal) Angel Ecu d'or Ecu d'or Couronne d'or Ecu d'or Ecu d'or Ecu d'or Florin Franc d'or à cheval Franc d'or à pied Couronne d'or Couronne d'or Couronne d'or Couronne d'or Écu vieux Franc d'or Écu vieux Écu vieux Écu à la couronne Écu à la couronne nouveau Écu soleil Écu soleil Écu soleil Écu d'or Hungarian ducat Hungarian ducat Hungarian ducat Hungarian ducat

king of England king of England king of England king of England king of England king of England king of England king of France king of France king of France king of France king of France king of France king of France king of France king of France king of France king of France king of France king of France king of France king of France king of France king of France king of France king of France king of France king of France king of France king of France king of Hungary king of Hungary king of Hungary king of Hungary

unit of taille fineness weight gold source source

weight

content type

349.920 349.920 349.920 349.920 349.920 349.920 349.920 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753

42.00 45.00 48.00 50.00 50.00 45.00 67.50 58.33 54.00 45.00 54.00 54.00 54.00 70.00 63.00 64.00 60.00 64.00 64.00 66.00 64.00 80.00 70.00 70.00 70.00 72.00 70.00 71.50 71.17 72.50 69.00

0.9705 8.3314 8.0855 H (Challis, 1992, p. 702) 0.9705 7.7760 7.5465 H (Challis, 1992, p. 703) 0.9705 7.2900 7.0748 H (Challis, 1992, p. 708) 0.9705 6.9984 6.7919 H (Challis, 1992, p. 708) 0.9705 6.9984 6.7919 H (Challis, 1992, p. 712) 0.9705 7.7760 7.5465 H (Challis, 1992, p. 713) 0.9705 5.1840 5.0310 H (Challis, 1992, p. 713) 1.0000 4.1958 4.1958 H (Blanchet and Dieudonné, 1912, p. 225) 1.0000 4.5325 4.5325 H (Blanchet and Dieudonné, 1912, p. 247) 1.0000 5.4390 5.4390 H (Blanchet and Dieudonné, 1912, p. 247) 1.0000 4.5325 4.5325 H (Blanchet and Dieudonné, 1912, p. 248) 0.8750 4.5325 3.9659 H (Blanchet and Dieudonné, 1912, p. 248) 0.8333 4.5325 3.7771 H (Blanchet and Dieudonné, 1912, p. 255) 1.0000 3.4965 3.4965 H (Blanchet and Dieudonné, 1912, p. 256) 1.0000 3.8850 3.8850 H (Blanchet and Dieudonné, 1912, p. 256) 1.0000 3.8243 3.8243 H (Blanchet and Dieudonné, 1912, p. 267) 1.0000 4.0792 4.0792 H (Blanchet and Dieudonné, 1912, p. 270) 1.0000 3.8243 3.8243 H (Blanchet and Dieudonné, 1912, p. 270) 0.9583 3.8243 3.6649 H (Blanchet and Dieudonné, 1912, p. 271) 1.0000 3.7084 3.7084 H (Blanchet and Dieudonné, 1912, p. 271) 1.0000 3.8243 3.8243 H (Blanchet and Dieudonné, 1912, p. 287) 1.0000 3.0594 3.0594 H (Blanchet and Dieudonné, 1912, p. 287) 0.9583 3.4965 3.3508 H (Blanchet and Dieudonné, 1912, p. 287) 0.7500 3.4965 2.6224 H (Blanchet and Dieudonné, 1912, p. 287) 1.0000 3.4965 3.4965 H (Blanchet and Dieudonné, 1912, p. 288) 0.9635 3.3993 3.2754 H (Blanchet and Dieudonné, 1912, p. 298) 0.9635 3.4965 3.3690 H (Blanchet and Dieudonné, 1912, p. 303) 0.9479 3.4231 3.2448 H (Blanchet and Dieudonné, 1912, p. 314) 0.9583 3.4392 3.2959 H (Blanchet and Dieudonné, 1912, p. 314) 0.9583 3.3759 3.2352 H (Blanchet and Dieudonné, 1912, p. 329) 0.9896 3.5471 3.5102 H (Huszár, 1970-72, p. 72) 0.9931 3.5830 3.5581 A (Hegel, 1862/1961, p. 230) 0.9931 3.5620 3.5373 A (Hegel, 1862/1961, p. 230) 0.9931 3.5560 3.5313 A (Hegel, 1862/1961, p. 230)

54

yyyy-mm-dd
1324-00-00 1390-00-00 1402-00-00 1402-06-10 1421-00-00 1422-00-00 1442-00-00 1460-00-00 1460-00-00 1461-00-00 1479-00-00 1510-00-00 1385-11-26 1399-09-19 1400-04-02 1401-04-29 1401-04-29 1402-06-23 1407-01-25 1417-12-02 1419-03-20 1454-10-29 1464-10-11 1477-06-29 1488-09-01 1490-11-15 1559-00-00

coin
Florin Florin Florin Florin Florin Florin Florin Florin Florin Florin Florin Florin Rheingulden Rheingulden Rheingulden Rheingulden Rheingulden Rheingulden Rheingulden Rheingulden Rheingulden Rheingulden Rheingulden Rheingulden Rheingulden Rheingulden Rheingulden

authority
republic of Florence republic of Florence republic of Florence republic of Florence republic of Florence republic of Florence republic of Florence republic of Florence republic of Florence republic of Florence republic of Florence republic of Florence rhenish electors rhenish electors rhenish electors rhenish electors rhenish electors rhenish electors rhenish electors rhenish electors rhenish electors rhenish electors rhenish electors rhenish electors rhenish electors rhenish electors rhenish electors

unit of taille fineness weight gold source source

weight

content type

339.542 339.542 339.542 339.542 339.542 339.542 339.542 339.542 339.542 339.542 339.542 339.542 233.888 233.888 233.888 233.888 233.888 233.888 233.888 233.888 350.831 350.831 350.831 350.831 350.831 350.831 233.888

96.33 96.50 101.67 102.00 96.00 95.60 96.00 96.50 96.33 96.42 96.25 96.75 66.00 66.00 66.50 67.50 68.00 66.00 66.00 66.00 100.00 102.00 103.00 104.00 105.00 107.00 72.00

0.9896 3.5247 3.4879 H (Bernocchi, 1976, p. 66) 0.9833 3.5186 3.4599 H (Bernocchi, 1976, p. 66) 0.8333 3.3398 2.7831 H (Bernocchi, 1976, p. 66) 0.8229 3.3288 2.7394 H (Bernocchi, 1976, p. 66; Grierson, 1981, p. 424) 0.8229 3.5369 2.9106 H (Bernocchi, 1976, p. 66) 0.8042 3.5517 2.8562 H (Bernocchi, 1976, p. 66) 0.8042 3.5369 2.8443 H (Bernocchi, 1976, p. 66) 0.9833 3.5186 3.4599 H (Bernocchi, 1976, p. 66) 0.9896 3.5247 3.4879 H (Bernocchi, 1976, p. 66) 0.9896 3.5216 3.4849 H (Grierson, 1981, p. 430) 0.9917 3.5277 3.4983 H (Bernocchi, 1976, p. 66) 0.9771 3.5095 3.4291 H (Bernocchi, 1976, p. 66) 0.9583 3.5438 3.3961 O (Weisenstein, 2002, pp. 106, 132) 0.9375 3.5438 3.3223 O (Weisenstein, 2002, pp. 106, 134) 0.9167 3.5171 3.2240 CA (Weisenstein, 2002, p. 134) 0.9167 3.4650 3.1763 CA (Weisenstein, 2002, p. 115) 0.9167 3.4395 3.1529 CA (Weisenstein, 2002, p. 115) 0.9375 3.5438 3.3223 O (Weisenstein, 2002, p. 116) 0.9167 3.5438 3.2484 O (Weisenstein, 2002, pp. 106, 135) 0.8333 3.5438 2.9531 O (Weisenstein, 2002, pp. 106, 136) 0.7917 3.5083 2.7774 O (Weisenstein, 2002, pp. 106, 137) 0.7917 3.4395 2.7230 O (Weisenstein, 2002, pp. 106, 138) 0.7917 3.4061 2.6965 O (Weisenstein, 2002, pp. 106, 138) 0.7847 3.3734 2.6472 MC (Weisenstein, 2002, pp. 106, 139) 0.7708 3.3413 2.5755 O (Weisenstein, 2002, pp. 106, 140) 0.7708 3.2788 2.5274 O (Weisenstein, 2002, pp. 106, 140) 0.7708 3.2484 2.5040 H (Weisenstein, 2002, p. 106)

55

Silver
yyyy-mm-dd
1332-03-13 1337-05-25 1346-01-20 1346-11-24 1351-05-28 1354-12-20 1359-10-22 1361-12-04 1365-04-12 1368-01-28 1369-04-21 1369-09-22 1373-06-18 1380-01-30 1383-09-12 1384-07-00 1386-04-00 1386-10-00 1387-04-00 1388-10-00 1389-12-00 1391-01-00 1393-06-00 1407-04-00 (c.) 1407-07-00 1409-08-00 1416-12-00 1418-06-12 1422-00-00 1425-07-00 1426-07-00 1426-12-00

Coin
Grote Grote Grote Grote Grote Grote Grote Grote Lion Lion Lion Grote Grote Double grote Double grote Double grote Double grote Double grote Double grote Double grote Double grote Double grote Double grote Double grote Double grote Double grote Double grote Double grote Double grote Double grote Double grote Double grote

nominal authority value
1d. count of Flanders 1d. count of Flanders 1d. count of Flanders 1d. count of Flanders 1d. count of Flanders 1d. count of Flanders 1d. count of Flanders 1d. count of Flanders
count of Flanders count of Flanders count of Flanders 1d. count of Flanders 1d. count of Flanders 2d. count of Flanders 2d. count of Flanders 2d. count of Flanders 2d. count of Flanders 2d. count of Flanders 2d. count of Flanders 2d. count of Flanders 2d. count of Flanders 2d. count of Flanders 2d. count of Flanders 2d. count of Flanders 2d. count of Flanders 2d. count of Flanders 2d. count of Flanders 2d. count of Flanders 2d. count of Flanders 2d. count of Flanders 2d. count of Flanders 2d. count of Flanders

unit of taille fineness weight silver source source

weight

content type

244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753

56.50 66.00 66.00 66.00 66.00 69.00 70.00 72.00 57.00 57.00 57.00
58.00 58.00 50.00 52.00 57.00 59.50 60.50 57.00 57.50 57.00 53.00 57.00 49.00 50.00 68.00 50.00 53.00 53.00 54.00

0.8542 0.6667 0.6389 0.5816 0.5417 0.5139 0.5000 0.5000 0.6667 0.6250 0.5972
0.5000 0.4792 0.5000 0.5000 0.5000 0.4306 0.4028 0.5000 0.5000 0.5000 0.5000 0.5000 0.5000 0.4167 0.5000 0.4167 0.4167 0.4115 0.4132

4.3319 3.7084 3.7084 3.7084 3.7084 3.5471 3.4965 3.3993 4.2939 4.2939 4.2939
4.2199 4.2199 4.8951 4.7068 4.2939 4.1135 4.0455 4.2939 4.2566 4.2939 4.6180 4.2939 4.9950 4.8951 3.5993 4.8951 4.6180 4.6180 4.5325

3.7002 H (Blockmans and Blockmans, 1979, p. 83) 2.4723 H (Blockmans and Blockmans, 1979, p. 83) 2.3692 H (Blockmans and Blockmans, 1979, p. 83) 2.1568 H (Blockmans and Blockmans, 1979, p. 89) 2.0087 H (Blockmans and Blockmans, 1979, p. 89) 1.8228 H (Blockmans and Blockmans, 1979, p. 89) 1.7482 H (Blockmans and Blockmans, 1979, p. 89) 1.6997 H (Blockmans and Blockmans, 1979, p. 89) 2.8626 H (Blockmans and Blockmans, 1979, p. 89) 2.6837 H (Blockmans and Blockmans, 1979, p. 89) 2.5644 H (Blockmans and Blockmans, 1979, p. 89) 1.1900 H (van der Wee, 1963, p. 125) 1.1100 H (van der Wee, 1963, p. 125) 2.1099 H (Blockmans and Blockmans, 1979, p. 89) 2.0220 H (Blockmans and Blockmans, 1979, p. 89) 2.4475 H (Munro, 1972, p. 211) 2.3534 H (Munro, 1972, p. 211) 2.1470 H (Munro, 1972, p. 211) 1.7711 H (Munro, 1972, p. 211) 1.6294 H (Munro, 1972, p. 211) 2.1470 H (Munro, 1972, p. 211) 2.1283 H (Munro, 1972, p. 211) 2.1470 H (Munro, 1972, p. 211) 2.3090 H (Munro, 1972, p. 211) 2.1470 H (Munro, 1972, p. 211) 2.4975 H (Munro, 1972, p. 211) 2.0396 H (Munro, 1972, p. 211) 1.7997 H (Munro, 1972, p. 211) 2.0396 H (Munro, 1972, p. 211) 1.9242 H (Munro, 1972, p. 211) 1.9001 H (Munro, 1972, p. 211) 1.8728 H (Munro, 1972, p. 211)

56

yyyy-mm-dd
1428-06-00 1428-11-00 1429-01-00 1429-06-00 1431-12-00 1433-05-00 1433-10-00 1466-05-23 1467-10-13 1474-10-27
1477-11-10 1485-08-06 1486-08-25 1487-07-05 1488-12-08 1489-12-14 1492-10-12
1495-01-30 1495-12-31
1496-04-10
1500-02-20 1500-02-20 1500-02-20 1505-09-00 1506-02-14
1506-02-14 1506-02-14 1506-02-14
1525-11-25

Coin nominal authority value

Double grote
Double grote
Double grote
Double grote
Double grote
Double grote
Double grote
Patard
Patard
Double patard Double stuyver
Coin of 6gr.
Double patard
Réal
Doubles
Réal
Double patard Double patards
Réal Toison d'argent Toison d'argent
Double patard
Double grote
Grote
Réal Double carolus
Carolus
Double grote Double carolus

2d. 2d. 2d. 2d. 2d. 2d. 2d. 2d. 2d. 4½d.

count of Flanders count of Flanders count of Flanders count of Flanders count of Flanders count of Flanders count of Flanders count of Flanders count of Flanders count of Flanders

5d. count of Flanders 6d. count of Flanders 5d. count of Flanders 16d. count of Flanders 12d. count of Flanders 9d. count of Flanders 4d. count of Flanders

4d. count of Flanders 12d. count of Flanders

6d. count of Flanders

6d. 4d. 2d. 1d. 6½d.

count of Flanders count of Flanders count of Flanders count of Flanders count of Flanders

6d. count of Flanders 3d. count of Flanders 2d. count of Flanders

6½d. count of Flanders

unit of taille fineness weight silver source source

weight

content type

244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753

54.00 68.50 54.00 54.00 54.00 70.00 72.00 82.50 84.50 72.50

0.3750 0.4444 0.3472 0.3333 0.3125 0.5000 0.5000 0.5000 0.5000 0.9167

4.5325 3.5730 4.5325 4.5325 4.5325 3.4965 3.3993 2.9667 2.8965 3.3759

1.6997 H (Munro, 1972, p. 211) 1.5880 H (Munro, 1972, p. 211) 1.5738 H (Munro, 1972, p. 211) 1.5108 H (Munro, 1972, p. 211) 1.4164 H (Munro, 1972, p. 211) 1.7482 H (Munro, 1972, p. 211) 1.6997 H (Munro, 1972, p. 211) 1.4834 H (Pusch, 1932, p. 79) 1.4482 H (Pusch, 1932, p. 79) 3.0946 H (Pusch, 1932, p. 80)

244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753 244.753

79.50 80.00 80.00 34.00 66.00 34.00 85.00

0.9583 0.8333 0.8333 0.9306 0.8056 0.9306 0.8333

3.0787 3.0594 3.0594 7.1986 3.7084 7.1986 2.8794

2.9504 H (Pusch, 1932, p. 80) 2.5495 H (Pusch, 1932, p. 81) 2.5495 H (Pusch, 1932, p. 81) 6.6987 H (Pusch, 1932, p. 81) 2.9873 H (Pusch, 1932, p. 82) 6.6987 H (Pusch, 1932, p. 82) 2.3995 H (Pusch, 1932, p. 82)

244.753 84.00 0.8333 2.9137 2.4281 H (Pusch, 1932, p. 83) 244.753 34.00 0.9306 7.1986 6.6987 H (Pusch, 1932, p. 83)

244.753 72.00 0.9167 3.3993 3.1161 H (Munro, 2001, p. 105)

244.753 72.00 244.753 79.00 244.753 79.00 244.753 134.00 244.753 71.25

0.9167 0.6667 0.3333 0.2708 0.9340

3.3993 3.0981 3.0981 1.8265 3.4351

3.1161 H (Munro, 2001, p. 105) 2.0654 H (Munro, 2001, p. 105) 1.0327 H (Munro, 2001, p. 105) 0.4947 H (Munro, 2001, p. 105) 3.2085 H (Pusch, 1932, p. 83)

244.753 244.753 244.753

80.00 78.50 80.00

0.9340 0.4583 0.3090

3.0594 3.1179 3.0594

2.8576 H (Pusch, 1932, p. 84) 1.4290 H (Munro, 2001, p. 105) 0.9454 H (Munro, 2001, p. 105)

244.753 80.00 0.9340 3.0594 2.8576 H (Pusch, 1932, p. 84)

57

yyyy-mm-dd
1527-03-01 1528-05-20 1300-00-00 1310-00-00 1335-00-00 1348-00-00 (c.) 1380-00-00 (c.) 1405-00-00 (c.) 1407-00-00 1470-00-00 (c.) 1485-00-00 1540-00-00 (c.) 1344-07-09 1345-06-23 1346-07-28 1351-06-20 1409-00-00 1413-04-14 1464-08-13 1533-04-06 1542-05-16 1547-04-05 1551-10-05 1553-08-20
1457-00-00 1457-00-00 1454-00-00 1454-00-00 1457-00-00 1374-00-00 (c.) 1374-00-00 (c.) 1380-02-02 1382-00-00 (c.)

Coin
Double carolus 6-gröscher Prague groat Prague groat Prague groat Prague groat Prague groat Prague groat Prague groat Prague groat Prague groat Prague groat Penny Penny Penny Groat Groat Groat Groat Groat Testoon Testoon Crown Groat
Shilling Shilling Shilling Shilling Shilling Shilling Halbscoter Shilling Shilling

nominal authority value

unit of taille fineness weight silver source source

weight

content type

6d. 108d.
1gr. 1gr. 1gr. 1gr. 1gr. 1gr. 1gr. 1gr. 1gr. 1gr. 1d. 1d. 1d. 4d. 4d. 4d. 4d. 4d. 12d. 12d. 60s. 4d.
6d. 6d. 6d. 6d. 6d. 12d. 15d. 12d. 12d.

count of Flanders duke of Prussia king of Bohemia king of Bohemia king of Bohemia king of Bohemia king of Bohemia king of Bohemia king of Bohemia king of Bohemia king of Bohemia king of Bohemia king of England king of England king of England king of England king of England king of England king of England king of England king of England king of England king of England king of England royal Prussia (Danzig) royal Prussia (Elbing) royal Prussia (estates) royal Prussia (estates) royal Prussia (Thorn) Teutonic Order Teutonic Order Teutonic Order Teutonic Order

244.753 80.00 197.980 37.00
349.920 266.00 349.920 268.00 349.920 270.00 349.920 75.00 349.920 84.00 349.920 90.00 349.920 112.50 373.242 135.00 373.242 48.00 373.242 48.00 373.242 12.00 373.242 180.00
190.034 135.75 190.034 142.00 190.034 112.50 190.034 110.50 190.034 142.00 190.034 112.00 190.034 62.00 190.034 112.00 190.034 120.00

0.9340 3.0594 2.8576 H (Pusch, 1932, p. 85) 0.8750 5.3510 4.6820 O (Volckart, 1997, p. 70)
3.9000 3.6000 H (Sprenger, 2002, p. 75) 3.6000 3.4000 H (Sprenger, 2002, p. 75) 3.5000 3.2000 H (Sprenger, 2002, p. 75) 3.4000 3.0000 H (Sprenger, 2002, p. 75) 2.9000 2.4000 H (Sprenger, 2002, p. 75) 2.7000 1.8000 H (Sprenger, 2002, p. 75) 2.7000 1.6000 H (Sprenger, 2002, p. 75) 2.7000 1.7000 H (Sprenger, 2002, p. 75) 2.7000 1.2000 H (Sprenger, 2002, p. 75) 2.0000 0.8000 H (Sprenger, 2002, p. 75) 0.9250 1.3155 1.2168 H (Challis, 1992, p. 701) 0.9250 1.3057 1.2077 H (Challis, 1992, p. 701) 0.9250 1.2960 1.1988 H (Challis, 1992, p. 701) 0.9250 4.6656 4.3157 H (Challis, 1992, p. 703) 0.9250 4.1657 3.8533 H (Challis, 1992, p. 708) 0.9250 3.8880 3.5964 H (Challis, 1992, p. 708) 0.9250 3.1104 2.8771 H (Challis, 1992, p. 712) 0.9250 2.7648 2.5574 H (Challis, 1992, p. 720) 0.7583 7.7759 5.8967 H (Challis, 1992, p. 721) 0.3333 7.7759 2.5920 H (Challis, 1992, p. 723) 0.9208 31.1035 28.6411 H (Challis, 1992, p. 727) 0.9167 2.0736 1.9008 H (Challis, 1992, p. 727)

0.3050 0.3000 0.5600 0.5950 0.2965 0.8455 0.6319 0.7292 0.8229

1.3999 1.3383 1.6892 1.7198 1.3383 1.6967 3.0651 1.6967 1.5836

0.4270 A (Kubiak, 1986, p. 185) 0.4015 A (Kubiak, 1986, p. 185) 0.9459 A (Kubiak, 1986, p. 184) 1.0233 A (Kubiak, 1986, p. 184) 0.3968 A (Kubiak, 1986, p. 184) 1.4346 A (Vossberg, 1843/1970, p. 208) 1.9369 A (Vossberg, 1843/1970, p. 208) 1.2372 O (Volckart, 1996, p. 396) 1.3032 A (Vossberg, 1843/1970, p. 208)

58

yyyy-mm-dd
1398-00-00 (c.) 1404-10-02 1408-00-00 (c.) 1409-00-00 (c.) 1411-00-00 1414-00-00 1414-00-00 1416-07-07 1416-07-07 1442-00-00 (c.) 1450-00-00 (c.) 1454-03-00 (c.) 1467-00-00 1470-00-00 1477-00-00 1489-00-00 1489-00-00 1489-00-00 1502-00-00 1508-02-27 1513-00-00 1515-00-00 1519-00-00 1519-09-29 1520-00-00 1379-02-09 1384-00-00 1384-00-00 1392-03-10 1398-00-00 1403-02-06 1406-03-31 1410-12-13 1411-00-00

Coin
Shilling Shilling Shilling Shilling Shilling Shilling Shilling Shilling Shilling Shilling Shilling Shilling Shilling Shilling Shilling Shilling Shilling Scoter Scoter Groschen Groschen Groschen Groschen Groschen Groschen Witten Witten Witten Sechsling Witten Witten Witten Witten Witten

nominal authority value
12d. Teutonic Order 12d. Teutonic Order 12d. Teutonic Order 12d. Teutonic Order 12d. Teutonic Order 12d. Teutonic Order 12d. Teutonic Order 12d. Teutonic Order 12d. Teutonic Order 12d. Teutonic Order 12d. Teutonic Order
6d. Teutonic Order 6d. Teutonic Order 6d. Teutonic Order 6d. Teutonic Order 6d. Teutonic Order 5d. Teutonic Order 15d. Teutonic Order 15d. Teutonic Order 18d. Teutonic Order 18d. Teutonic Order 18d. Teutonic Order 18d. Teutonic Order 18d. Teutonic Order 18d. Teutonic Order 4d. Wendish Union 4d. Wendish Union 4d. Wendish Union 6d. Wendish Union 4d. Wendish Union 4d. Wendish Union 4d. Wendish Union 4d. Wendish Union 4d. Wendish Union

unit of taille fineness weight silver source source

weight

content type

190.034 115.00 190.034 112.00 190.034 115.40 190.034 114.50 190.034 122.00 190.034 125.70 190.034 120.00 190.034 112.00 190.034 113.00 190.034 116.70 190.034 125.70 190.034 132.00 190.034 140.50 190.034 135.00 190.034 142.00 190.034 142.00 190.034 142.00 190.034 120.00 190.034 120.00 190.034 129.00 190.034 131.00 190.034 131.00 190.034 93.00 190.034 131.00 190.034 131.00 233.888 176.00 233.888 178.00 233.888 180.00 233.888 114.00 233.888 193.00 233.888 192.00 233.888 196.00 233.888 200.00 233.888 208.00

0.7014 0.7500 0.7083 0.6667 0.4167 0.2622 0.1910 0.5417 0.5417 0.5008 0.3414 0.2465 0.2448 0.2361 0.2014 0.2014 0.2014 0.5208 0.5000 0.5000 0.5000 0.4844 0.3750 0.4844 0.3125 0.8438 0.8438 0.8438 0.7500 0.8125 0.7813 0.7500 0.7500 0.7500

1.6525 1.6967 1.6467 1.6597 1.5577 1.5118 1.5836 1.6967 1.6817 1.6284 1.5118 1.4396 1.3526 1.4077 1.3383 1.3383 1.3383 1.5836 1.5836 1.4731 1.4506 1.4506 2.0434 1.4506 1.4506 1.3289 1.3140 1.2994 2.0516 1.2119 1.2182 1.1933 1.1694 1.1245

1.1590 A (Vossberg, 1843/1970, p. 208) 1.2725 MA (Volckart, 1996, p. 397) 1.1664 A (Vossberg, 1843/1970, p. 208) 1.1065 A (Vossberg, 1843/1970, p. 208) 0.6490 A (Vossberg, 1843/1970, p. 208) 0.3963 A (Vossberg, 1843/1970, p. 209) 0.3024 CA (Ropp, 1878, p. 225) 0.9191 O (Töppen, 1878, no. 226, p. 280) 0.9109 CA (Ropp, 1878, p. 225) 0.8155 A (Vossberg, 1843/1970, p. 209) 0.5162 A (Vossberg, 1843/1970, p. 209) 0.3549 A (Vossberg, 1843/1970, p. 209) 0.3311 A (Vossberg, 1843/1970, p. 209) 0.3324 A (Vossberg, 1843/1970, p. 210) 0.2695 A (Vossberg, 1843/1970, p. 210) 0.2695 A (Vossberg, 1843/1970, p. 210) 0.2695 A (Vossberg, 1843/1970, p. 210) 0.8248 A (Vossberg, 1843/1970, p. 210) 0.7918 CA (GSTA PK, XX. HA, OF 24a, p. 263) 0.7366 CA (Volckart, 1996, p. 407) 0.7253 CA (Hubatsch, 1968, p. 490) 0.7027 CA (Hubatsch, 1968, p. 490) 0.7663 CA (Hubatsch, 1968, p. 491) 0.7027 MC (Hubatsch, 1968, p. 494) 0.4533 CA (Hubatsch, 1968, p. 490) 1.1213 O (Hanserecesse, 1872, no. 172, p. 187) 1.1087 CA (Hanserecesse, 1872, no. 288, p. 341) 1.0963 CA (Hanserecesse, 1872, no. 288, p. 341) 1.5387 O (Hanserecesse, 1897, no. 949, p. 619) 0.9846 O (Grauthoff, 1836, p. 190) 0.9517 O (Verein für Lübeckische Geschichte und Alterthumskunde, 1 0.8950 O (Hanserecesse, 1880, no. 310, p. 231) 0.8771 O (Hanserecesse, 1880, no. 729, p. 565) 0.8433 O (Grauthoff, 1836, p. 202)

59

yyyy-mm-dd
1423-07-16 1424-10-08 1432-09-18 1433-01-13 1439-02-04 1439-05-16 1441-10-14 1450-11-25 1461-12-07
1461-12-07
1467-10-15
1468-06-15
1492-05-23 1501-00-00 1506-12-29 1512-00-00 1515-00-00 1543-00-00 1551-00-00

Coin
Sechsling Sechsling Shilling Shilling Shilling Shilling Shilling Shilling Shilling Double shilling Double shilling Double shilling Double shilling  mark Mark Mark Mark Mark Mark

nominal authority value
6d. Wendish Union 6d. Wendish Union 12d. Wendish Union 12d. Wendish Union 12d. Wendish Union 12d. Wendish Union 12d. Wendish Union 12d. Wendish Union 12d. Wendish Union

24d. Wendish Union

24d. Wendish Union

24d. Wendish Union

24d. 128d. 192d. 192d. 192d. 192d. 192d.

Wendish Union Wendish Union Wendish Union Wendish Union Wendish Union Wendish Union Wendish Union

unit of taille fineness weight silver source source

weight

content type

233.888 168.00 233.888 168.00 233.888 92.00 233.888 95.00 233.888 98.00 233.888 96.00 233.888 97.00 233.888 97.00 233.888 104.00

0.7500 0.7031 0.6250 0.6250 0.6250
0.6250 0.6250 0.5625

1.3922 1.3922 2.5423 2.4620 2.3866
2.4112 2.4112 2.2489

1.0441 O (Hanserecesse, 1893, no. 609, p. 417) 0.9789 O (Hanserecesse, 1893, no. 740, p. 498) 1.5889 O (Ropp, 1876, no. 148, p. 100) 1.5387 O (Bahrfeld, 1909, p. 207) 1.4916 O (Ropp, 1878, no. 302, p. 237)
O (Ropp, 1878, no. 302, p. 237) 1.5070 O (Ropp, 1878, no. 521, p. 444 f.) 1.5070 O (Ropp, 1881, no. 676, p. 515) 1.2650 O (Ropp, 1888, p. 105)

233.888 70.00 0.7500 3.3413 2.5059 O (Ropp, 1888, p. 105)

233.888 67.50 0.8125 3.4650 2.8153 O (Ropp, 1890, no. 57, p. 38)

233.888 69.00 0.7500 3.3897 2.5423 O (Ropp, 1890, no. 92, p. 66 f.)

233.888 233.888 233.888 233.888 233.888 233.888 233.888

69.00 17.25 12.00 13.00 12.00 12.00 12.00

0.7500 3.3897 2.5423 O (Schäfer, 1888, no. 86, p. 67) 0.9375 13.5587 12.7113 H (Jesse, 1928, p. 127). 0.9375 19.4906 18.2725 H (Schäfer, 1894, no. 151, p. 251) 0.9063 17.9913 16.3047 H (Jesse, 1928, p. 211). 0.9063 19.4906 17.6634 H (Jesse, 1928, p. 211). 0.9375 19.4906 18.2725 H (Jesse, 1928, p. 211). 0.9028 19.4906 17.5957 H (Jesse, 1928, p. 211).

60

4. Prices of rye (Hamburg and Lüneburg) per wispel

year
1365 1366 1367 1368 1369 1370 1371 1372 1373 1374 1375 1376 1377 1378 1379 1380 1381 1382 1383 1384 1385 1386 1387 1461 1462 1463

Mark of Lübeck 4.3750 3.4375
3.7500
3.1250 3.1250
5.0000 2.0313 3.4063 3.0000 2.9116 2.9431 3.0078 4.5313 3.1250 3.1250 3.4927 3.5938 3.4375
3.7500

year
1464 1465 1466 1467 1468 1469 1470 1471 1472 1473 1474 1475 1476 1477 1478 1479 1480 1481 1482 1483 1484 1485 1486 1487 1488 1489

Mark of Lübeck 3.7500
5.2254
4.2500 5.7917 5.9969 5.5556 6.1557 8.4615 6.7090 5.7292 7.9327
6.2885 5.2500 6.0000 5.9504 5.6834

year
1490 1491 1492 1493 1494 1495 1496 1497 1498 1499 1500 1522 1523 1524 1525 1526 1527 1528 1529 1530 1531 1532 1533 1534 1535 1536

Mark of Lübeck 6.0000 15.3719 12.7893
5.8264
4.5000
4.9590 5.4098 12.2500
11.9998 12.0000
9.0000 9.6725 9.7500 17.0858 20.0071 16.7500 8.2093 7.3750 8.3969 12.0000

1 wispel = 840.33 litres (Witthöft, 1979, p. 521).

year
1537 1538 1539 1540 1541 1542 1543 1544 1545 1546 1547 1548 1549 1550 1551 1552 1553 1554 1555 1556 1557 1558 1559 1560 1561 1562

Mark of Lübeck
13.2505
13.1234 13.5789 13.5294 12.6395 16.4146 14.2529 15.8684 25.1875 19.8326 12.1790 19.5402 17.3353 26.6667 26.7177 22.5000 22.5000 18.3333 20.0000

61

References
Ahrens, Gerhard (1962). Das Botenwesen der Hamburger Kaufmannschaft (15171821), Archiv für deutsche Postgeschichte 1, 28-42.
Bahrfeld, Max (1909). Der Münzrezeß der vier wendischen Städte von 1433, Januar 13, Hansische Geschichtsblätter 15, 205-209.
Barzel, Yoram (1997). Economic Analysis of Property Rights. 2. impr., Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Benham, A. and L. Benham. 1998. Measuring the Costs of Exchange. Paper read at Conference of the International Society for the New Institutional Economics, at Paris.
Berghaus, Peter (1965). Umlauf und Nachprägung des Florentiner Guldens nördlich der Alpen Congresso Internazionale di Numismatica, Roma 11­16 settembre 1961, vol. 2: Atti, Rome: Commision Internationale de Numismatique, 595-607.
Bernocchi, Mario (1976). Le monete della Repubblica Fiorentina, vol. 3: Documentazione, Firenze: Leo S. Olschki.
Blanchet, A. and A. Dieudonné (1912). Manuel de numismatique Française, vol. 2: Monnaies royales Françaises depuis Hugues Capet jusqu'a la Révolution, Paris: Picard.
Blockmans, Frans and Wim P. Blockmans (1979). Devaluation, Coinage and Seignorage under Louis de Nevers and Louis de Male, Counts of Flanders, 133084, in: Nicholas J. Mayhew (ed.), Coinage in the Low Countries (880-1500): The Third Oxford Symposium on Coinage and Monetary History, Oxford: B.A.R., 6994.
Blockmans, Wim (1990). Handelstechniken in Flandern und Brabant im Vergleich mit denjenigen der Hanse, 14. - 15. Jahrhundert, in: Klaus Friedland (ed.), BrüggeKolloquium des Hansischen Geschichtsvereins 26.-29. Mai 1988: Referate und Diskussionen, Köln, Wien: Böhlau, 25-32.
Blockmans, Wim P. and Walter Prevenier (1999). The Promised Lands: The Low Countries under Burgundian Rule, 1369-1530, Philadelphia: University of Pennsilvania Press.
Blum, Ulrich and Leonard Dudley (2003). Standardised Latin and Medieval Economic Growth, European Review of Economic History 7, 2, 213-238.
Bonus, Holger and Anke Maselli (1996). Transaktionskostenökonomik GablerVolkswirtschafts-Lexikon, vol. 2: L-Z, Wiesbaden: Gabler, 1082-1085.
Boockmann, Hartmut (1992). Ostpreußen und Westpreußen, Berlin: Siedler. Braudel, Fernand (1949/86). The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the
Age of Philipp II, vol. 1. 5. impr., Glasgow: Fontana. Braudel, Fernand and Frank Spooner (1967). Prices in Europe from 1450 to 1750, in:
E.E. Rich/C.H. Wilson (eds.), The Cambridge Economic History of Europe, vol. 4: The Economy of Expanding Europe in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries, Cambridge, London, New York, Melbourne: Cambridge University Press, 374-486. Cahn, Julius (1895). Münz- und Geldgeschichte der Stadt Strassburg im Mittelalter, Strassburg: Trübner. Challis, C.E., ed. (1992). A New History of the Royal Mint, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Ciesielska, Karola and Irena Janosz-Biskupowa, eds. (1964). Ksiega dlugów miasta Torunia z okresu Wojny Trzynastoletniej, Torun: Praca Wydana z Zasilku Polskiej Akademii Nauk. Coase, Ronald H. (1937). The Nature of the Firm, Economica 4, 386-405.
62

Coase, Ronald H. (1960). The Problem of Social Cost, Journal of Law and Economics 3, 1-44.
de Roover, Raymond (1968). The Bruges Money Market Around 1400, Brussel: Paleis der Academien.
Denzel, Markus A., ed. (1994). Währungen der Welt IX: Europäische Wechselkurse von 1383 bis 1620, Stuttgart: Steiner.
Dittmer, H.C. (1860). Geschichte der ersten Gold-Ausmünzungen zu Lübeck im 14. Jahrhundert, Zeitschrift des Vereins für Lübeckische Geschichte und Alterthumskunde 1, 22-78.
Dollinger, Philippe (1964/88). La Hanse (XIIe-XVIIe siècles), Paris: Aubier. Dudley, Leonard (1999). Communications and Economic Growth, European Economic
Review 43, 595-619. Eggertsson, Thráinn (1990). Economic Behavior and Institutions, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. Ennen, Leonard (1865). Geschichte der Stadt Köln, vol. 3, Köln, Neuß: L.
Schwann'sche Verlagshandlung. Ennen, Leonard (1875). Geschichte der Stadt Köln, vol. 4, Köln, Neuß: Schwann'sche
Verlagshandlung. Furubotn, Eirik and Rudolf Richter (1991). The New Institutional Economics: An
Assessment, in: ibid. (eds.), The New Institutional Economics, Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 1-32. Furubotn, Eirik and Rudolf Richter (1997). Institutions and Economic Theory: The Contribution of the New Institutional Economics, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. Gabrielsson, Peter (1982). Die Zeit der Hanse, in: Hans-Dieter Loose (ed.), Hamburg: Geschichte der Stadt und ihrer Bewohner, vol. 1: Von den Anfängen bis zur Reichsgründung, Hamburg: Hoffmann und Campe, 101-190. Gerteis, Klaus (1989). Reisen, Boten, Posten, Korrespondenz in Mittelalter und Früher Neuzeit, in: Hans Pohl (ed.), Die Bedeutung der Kommunikation für Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft: Referate der 12. Arbeitstagung der Gesellschaft für Sozial- und Wirtschaftsgeschichte vom 22.-25.4.1987 in Siegen, Stuttgart: Steiner, 19-36. Giard, Jean Baptiste (1967). Le Florin d'or au Baptiste et ses imitations en France au XIVe siècle, Bibliotheque de l'Ecole des Chartes 125, 94-141. Gilliodts-van Severen, Louis (1885). Un précurseur des almanachs de commerce, La Flandre: Revue des monuments d'histoire et d'antiquités 16, 201-216. Górski, Karol and Marian Biskup, eds. (1957). Akta Stanów Prus Królewskich, vol. 2 (1489-1492), Torun: Towarzystwo Naukowe w Toruniu. Grauthoff, F.H. (1836). Geschichte des lübeckischen Münzfußes bis zum Jahre 1463 Historische Schriften aus dem Nachlasse von Dr. F.H. Grauthoff, vol. 3, Lübeck: von Rohde'sche Buchhandlung, 3-266. Grierson, Philip (1981). The Weight of the Gold Florin in the Fifteenth Century, Quaderni Ticinesi: Numismatica e Antichità Classiche 10, 421-431. Hanserecesse (1872). Die Recesse und andere Akten der Hansetage von 1256-1430, vol. 2 (1. Abt.), Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot. Hanserecesse (1875). Die Recesse und andere Akten der Hansetage von 1256-1430, vol. 3 (1. Abt.), Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot. Hanserecesse (1877). Die Recesse und andere Akten der Hansetage von 1256-1430, vol. 4 (1. Abt.), Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot. Hanserecesse (1880). Die Recesse und andere Akten der Hansetage von 1256-1430, vol. 5 (1. Abt.), Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot.
63

Hanserecesse (1893). Die Recesse und andere Akten der Hansetage von 1256-1430, vol. 7 (1. Abt.), Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot.
Hanserecesse (1897). Die Recesse und andere Akten der Hansetage von 1256-1430, vol. 8 (1. Abt.), Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot.
Hegel, K. (1862/1961). Münzverhältnisse, in: Historische Kommission bei der bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften (ed.), Die Chroniken der fränkischen Städte: Nürnberg, vol. 1, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 224-254.
Henning, Friedrich-Wilhelm (1981). Zahlungsusancen und Nichtmetallgeld im ausgehenden Mittelalter: Ein Beitrag zur Entwicklung von Buch- und Papiergeld, in: Hermann Kellenbenz (ed.), Weltwirtschaftliche und währungspolitische Probleme seit dem Ausgang des Mittelalters: Bericht über die 7. Arbeitstagung der Gesellschaft für Sozial- und Wirtschaftsgeschichte, Stuttgart, New York: Fischer, 39-60.
Hoffmann, Erich, ed. (1988). Lübeck im Hoch- und Spätmittelalter: Die große Zeit Lübecks, Lübeck: Schmidt Römhild.
Hubatsch, Walther, ed. (1968). Scriptores Rerum Prussicarum: Die Geschichtsquellen der preußischen Vorzeit, vol. 6, Frankfurt: Minerva.
Huszár, Lajos (1970-72). Der ungarische Goldgulden im mittelalterlichen Münzverkehr, Hamburger Beiträge zur Numismatik 24/26, 71-88.
Jenks, Stuart (1982). War die Hanse kreditfeindlich?, Vierteljahrschrift für Sozial- und Wirtschaftsgeschichte 69, 3, 305-338.
Jesse, Wilhelm (1928). Der Wendische Münzverein, Lübeck: Hansischer Geschichtsverein.
Kellenbenz, Hermann, ed. (1974). Das Meder'sche Handelsbuch und die Welser'schen Nachträge, Wiesbaden: Steiner.
Kindleberger, Charles P. (1989). Economic Laws and Economic History, Cambridge, New York, New Rochelle, Melbourne, Sydney: Cambridge University Press.
Koppmann, Karl, ed. (1869). Kämmereirechnungen der Stadt Hamburg: 1350-1400, Hamburg: Hermann Grüning.
Koppmann, Karl, ed. (1873). Kämmereirechnungen der Stadt Hamburg: 1401-1470, Hamburg: Hermann Grüning.
Koppmann, Karl, ed. (1878). Kämmereirechnungen der Stadt Hamburg: 1471-1500, Hamburg: Hermann Grüning.
Koppmann, Karl, ed. (1880). Kämmereirechnungen der Stadt Hamburg von 1482-1500, Hamburg: Hermann Grüning.
Koppmann, Karl, ed. (1883). Kämmereirechnungen der Stadt Hamburg: 1501-1540, vol. 5, Hamburg: Hermann Grüning.
Koppmann, Karl, ed. (1892). Kämmereirechnungen der Stadt Hamburg 1541-1554, Hamburg: Gräfe & Sillem.
Koppmann, Karl, ed. (1894). Kämmereirechnungen der Stadt Hamburg 1555-1562, vol. 7, Hamburg: Gräfe & Sillem.
Kubiak, Stanislawa (1986). Monety i stosunki monetarne w Prusach Królewskich w 2 polowie XV wieku, Wroclaw, Warszawa, Kraków, Gdansk, Lódz: Zaklad Narodowy Imiena Ossolinskich Wydawnictwo Polskiej Akademii Nauk.
Kunzel, Michael (1998). Die Münzen der Hansestadt Wismar 1359 bis 1854: Münzgeschichte und Geprägekatalog, Wismar, Berlin: Stadtgeschichtliches Museum Wismar.
Lane, Frederic C. and Reinhold C. Mueller (1985). Money and Banking in Medieval and Renaissance Venice, vol. 1: Coins and Moneys of Account, Baltimore, London: John Hopkins University Press.
64

Lesnikov, Michail P., ed. (1973). Die Handelsbücher des hansischen Kaufmanns Veckinghusen, Berlin: Akademie-Verlag.
Lohmeyer, Karl, ed. (1893). Kaspars von Nostitz Haushaltungsbuch des Fürstenthums Preussen. 1578, Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot.
Luschin von Ebengreuth, Arnold (1892). Das Werthverhältnis der Edelmetalle in Deutschland während des Mittelalters, Bruxelles: J. Goemaere.
Maack, E. (1935). Die Anfänge hamburgischen Postwesens, in: Hamburg-Altonaer Verein für Briefmarkenkunde (ed.), Hamburg, seine Postgeschichte, Postwertzeichen und Poststempel: Festschrift zur Erinnerung an die 50jährige Wiederkehr des Gründungstages des Vereins für Briefmarkenkunde zu Hamburg von 1885, Hamburg: Verein für Briefmarkenkunde, 1-14.
Mauro, Paolo, Nathan Sussman and Yishay Yafeh (2006). Emerging Markets and Financial Globalization: Sovereign Bond Spreads in 1870-1913 and today, Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press.
Mayhew, Nicholas J. (1974). Numismatic Evidence and Falling Prices in the Fourteenth Century, Economic History Review 27, 1, 1-15.
Menard, Claude (1991). Transport Costs and Long-Range Trade, 1300-1800: Was there a European 'Transport Revolution' in the Early Modern Era?, in: J. Tracy (ed.), The Political Economy of Merchant Empires: State Power and World Trade, 13501750, Cambridge, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Metz, Rainer (1990). Geld, Währung und Preisentwicklung: Der Niederrheinraum im europäischen Vergleich 1350-1800, Frankfurt: Fritz Knapp.
Miskimin, Harry (1963). Money, Prices, and Foreign Exchange in Fourteenth-Century France, New Haven, London: Yale University Press.
Miskimin, Harry (1985/89). The Enforcement of Gresham's Law, in: Harry Miskimin (ed.), Cash, Credit and Crisis in Europe, 1300-1600, London: Variorum Reprints, IX, 147-161.
Mollwo, Carl, ed. (1901). Das Handlungsbuch von Hermann und Johann Wittenborg, Leipzig: Dyksche Buchhandlung.
Munro, John H. (1972). Wool, Cloth, and Gold: The Struggle for Bullion in AngloBurgundian Trade, 1340-1478, Brussels, Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Munro, John H. (1991). Die Anfänge der Übertragbarkeit: Einige Kreditinnovationen im englisch-flämischen Handel des Spätmittelalter (1360-1540), in: Michael North (ed.), Kredit im spätmittelalterlichen und frühneuzeitlichen Europa, Köln, Wien: Böhlau, 39-69.
Munro, John H. (1998). The Maze of Medieval Mint Metrology in Flanders, France and England: Determining the Weight of the Marc de Troyes and the Tower Pound from the Economics of Counterfeiting, 1388-1469. Toronto: Department of Economics and Institute for Policy Analysis, University of Toronto Working Paper No. UT-ECIPA-MUNRO5-98-01.
Munro, John H. (2001). Money, Wages and Real Income in the Age of Erasmus: The Purchasing Power of Coins and Building Craftsmen's Wages in England and the Low Countries, 1500-1540. Toronto: Department of Economics and Institute of Policy Analysis, University of Toronto Working Paper No. 1 for 2001 (UT-ECIPAMUNRO-01-01).
Neal, Larry (1985). Integration of International Capital Markets: Quantitative Evidence from the Eighteenth to the Twentieth Centuries, Journal of Economic History 45, 219-226.
Neal, Larry (1987). The Integration and Efficiency of the London and Amsterdam Stock Markets in the Eighteenth Century, Journal of Economic History 47, 97-115.
Nicholas, David (1992). Medieval Flanders, London, New York: Longman.
65

Nirrnheim, Hans, ed. (1895). Das Handlungsbuch Vickos von Geldersen, Hamburg, Leipzig: Leopold Voss.
Nirrnheim, Hans, ed. (1930). Das hamburgische Pfund- und Werkzollbuch von 1399 und 1400, Hamburg: Lütcke & Wulff.
North, Douglass C. (1984a). Government and the Cost of Exchange in History, Journal of Economic History 44, 255-264.
North, Douglass C. (1984b). Transaction Costs, Institutions, and Economic History, Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics (JITE) 140, 203-213.
North, Douglass C. (1987). Institutions, Transaction Costs and Economic Growth, Economic Inquiry 25, 419-428.
North, Douglass C. (1992). Transaction Costs, Institutions, and Economic Performance, San Francisco: International Center for Economic Growth.
North, Michael (1990). Geldumlauf und Wirtschaftskonjunktur im südlichen Ostseeraum an der Wende zur Neuzeit (1440-1570): Untersuchungen zur Wirtschaftsgeschichte am Beispiel des Großen Lübecker Münzschatzes, der norddeutschen Münzfunde und der schriftlichen Überlieferung, Sigmaringen: Thorbecke.
Pauli, Carl Wilhelm (1847). Lübeckische Zustände zu Anfang des vierzehnten Jahrhunderts: Sechs Vorlesungen gehalten in den Jahren 1838 bis 1846, Lübeck: Friedr. Aschenfeld.
Pauli, Carl Wilhelm (1872). Lübeckische Zustände im Mittelalter: Vorlesungen, gehalten in den Jahren 1850 bis 1868, Lübeck: C. Bolhoevener.
Pitz, Ernst, ed. (1961). Die Zolltarife der Stadt Hamburg, Wiesbaden: Steiner. Postel, Rainer (1982). Reformation und Gegenreformation 1517-1618, in: Hans-Dieter
Loose (ed.), Hamburg: Geschichte der Stadt und ihrer Bewohner, vol. 1: Von den Anfängen bis zur Reichsgründung, Hamburg: Hoffmann und Campe, 191-258. Posthumus, N.W. (1953). De oosterse handel te Amsterdam: Het oudst bewaarde koopmansboek van een Amsterdamse vennootschap betreffende de handel op de oostzee, Leiden: Brill. Pusch, Gottfried (1932). Staatliche Münz- und Geldpolitik in den Niederlanden unter den burgundischen und habsburgischen Herrschern besonders unter Kaiser Karl V., München: Val. Höfling. Ranft, Andreas (1987). Der Basishaushalt der Stadt Lüneburg in der Mitte des 15. Jahrhunderts: Zur Struktur der städtischen Finanzen im Spätmittelalter, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. Reinecke, Wilhelm (1933). Geschichte der Stadt Lüneburg, vol. 1, Lüneburg: Selbstverlag des Museumsvereins. Ropp, Goswin Frhr. von der, ed. (1876). Hanserecesse von 1431-1476, vol. 1 (2. Abt.), Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot. Ropp, Goswin Frhr. von der, ed. (1878). Hanserecesse von 1431-1476, vol. 2 (2. Abt.), Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot. Ropp, Goswin Frhr. von der, ed. (1881). Hanserecesse von 1431-1476, vol. 3 (2. Abt.), Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot. Ropp, Goswin Frhr. von der, ed. (1888). Hanserecesse von 1431-1476, vol. 5 (2. Abt.), Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot. Ropp, Goswin Frhr. von der, ed. (1890). Hanserecesse von 1431-1476, vol. 6 (2. Abt.), Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot. Schäfer, Dietrich, ed. (1881). Hanserecesse von 1477-1530, vol. 1 (3. Abt.), Leipzig: Duncker & Humbot. Schäfer, Dietrich, ed. (1888). Hanserecesse von 1477-1530, vol. 3 (3. Abt.), Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot.
66

Schäfer, Dietrich, ed. (1894). Hanserecesse von 1477-1530, vol. 5 (3. Abt.), Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot.
Schrötter, Friedrich Frhr. von (1930). Wörterbuch der Münzkunde, Berlin, Leipzig: de Gruyter.
Schubert, Eric S. (1988). Innovations, Debts, and Bubbles: International Integration of Financial Markets in Western Europe, 1688-1720, Journal of Economic History 48, 2, 299-306.
Schubert, Eric S. (1989). Arbitrage in the Foreign Exchange Markets of London and Amsterdam During the 18th Century, Explorations in Economic History 26, 1-20.
Sprenger, Bernd (2002). Das Geld der Deutschen: Geldgeschichte Deutschlands von den Anfängen bis zur Gegenwart. 3. impr., Paderborn, München, Wien, Zürich: Schöningh.
Spufford, Peter (1986). Handbook of Medieval Exchange, London: Offices of the Royal Historical Society.
Stefke, Gerald (2002). Der "Wendische Münzverein" als spätmittelalterliche Währungsunion und andere norddeutsche Münzkonventionen des 13./14.-16. Jahrhunderts, in: Reiner Cunz (ed.), Währungsunionen: Beiträge zur Geschichte überregionaler Münz- und Geldpolitik, Hamburg: Museum für Hamburgische Geschichte, 145-195.
Stein, Walther (1898). Handelsbriefe aus Riga und Königsberg von 1458 und 1461, Hansische Geschichtsblätter 27, 56-125.
Stein, Walther, ed. (1903). Hansisches Urkundenbuch, vol. 9: 1463 bis 1470, Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot.
Stein, Walther, ed. (1907). Hansisches Urkundenbuch, vol. 10: 1471 bis 1485, Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot.
Stein, Walther, ed. (1916). Hansisches Urkundenbuch, vol. 11: 1486 bis 1500, München, Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot.
Stieda, Wilhelm (1887). Ein Geldgeschäft Kaiser Sigismunds mit hansischen Kaufleuten, Hansische Geschichtsblätter 6, 61-82.
Stieda, Wilhelm (1894). Hansisch-venetianische Handelsbeziehungen im 15. Jahrhundert: Festschrift der Landes-Universität Rostock, Rostock: UniversitätsBuchdruckerei.
Stieda, Wilhelm, ed. (1921). Hildebrand Veckinghusen: Briefwechsel eines deutschen Kaufmanns im 15. Jahrhundert, Leipzig: Hirzel.
Thunert, Franz, ed. (1896). Acten der Ständetage Preussens, Königlichen Anteils, vol. 1: 1466-1479, Danzig: A.W. Kafemann.
Töppen, Max, ed. (1878). Acten der Ständetage Preußens unter der Herrschaft des Deutschen Ordens, vol. 1 (Die Jahre 1233-1435), Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot.
Töppen, Max, ed. (1886). Acten der Ständetage Preußens unter der Herrschaft des Deutschen Ordens, vol. 5 (1458-1525), Leipzig.
van der Wee, Herman (1963). The Growth of the Antwerp Market and the European Economy (fourteenth-sixteenth centuries), vol. 1: Statistics, The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Verein für Lübeckische Geschichte und Alterthumskunde, ed. (1871). Urkundenbuch der Stadt Lübeck, vol. 3 (1. Abt.), Lübeck: Ferdinand Grauthoff.
Verein für Lübeckische Geschichte und Alterthumskunde, ed. (1877). Urkunden-Buch der Stadt Lübeck, vol. 5 (1. Abt.), Lübeck: Ferdinand Grauthoff.
Verein für Lübeckische Geschichte und Alterthumskunde, ed. (1898). Urkunden-Buch der Stadt Lübeck, vol. 10 (1. Abt.): 1461-1465, Lübeck: Edmund Schmersahl Nachf.
67

Verein für meklenburgische Geschichte und Alterthumskunde, ed. (1875). Meklenburgisches Urkundenbuch, vol. 9: 1337-1345, Schwerin: Stiller'sche Hofbuchhandlung.
Voigt, Johannes, ed. (1853). Codex Diplomaticus Prussicus: Urkunden-Sammlung zur ältern Geschichte Preussens, vol. 4, Königsberg: Bornträger.
Volckart, Oliver (1996). Die Münzpolitik im Deutschordensland und Herzogtum Preußen von 1370 bis 1550, Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Volckart, Oliver (1997). Die Anfänge der Quantitätstheorie des Geldes und ihre Bedeutung für die polnische und preußische Münzpolitik des 16. Jahrhunderts, Beiträge zur Geschichte Westpreußens 15, 49-73.
Volckart, Oliver (2004). The Economics of Feuding in Late Medieval Germany, Explorations in Economic History 41, 282-299.
Volckart, Oliver and Nikolaus Wolf (2006). Estimating Financial Integration in the Middle Ages: What can we learn from a TAR-model?, Journal of Economic History (forthcoming).
Vossberg, Friedrich August (1843/1970). Geschichte der preussischen Münzen und Siegel von frühester Zeit bis zum Ende der Herrschaft des Deutschen Ordens, Leipzig: Zentralantiquariat der DDR.
Wallis, J.J. and Douglass C. North (1986). Measuring the Transaction Sector in the American Economy, 1870-1970, in: Stanley L. Engerman/R.E. Gallman (eds.), Long-term Factors in American Economic Growth, Chicago, 95-161.
Wang, Ning (2003). Measuring Transaction Costs: An Incomplete Survey: Ronald Coase Institute Working Paper 2.
Watson, Andrew M. (1967). Back to Gold - and Silver, Economic History Review 20, 1, 1-34.
Weisenstein, Karl (2002). Die Münzpolitik der rheinischen Kurfürsten (Rheinischer Münzverein) unter besonderer Berücksichtigung der Einflüsse von Reich und Städten, in: Reiner Cunz (ed.), Währungsunionen: Beiträge zur Geschichte überregionaler Münz- und Geldpolitik, Hamburg: Museum für Hamburgische Geschichte, 105-143.
Wischermann, Clemens (1993). Der Property-Rights-Ansatz und die "neue" Wirtschaftsgeschichte, Geschichte und Gesellschaft 19, 239-258.
Witthöft, Harald (1979). Umrisse einer historischen Metrologie zum Nutzen der Wirtschafts- und Sozialgeschichtlichen Forschung: Maß und Gewicht in Stadt und Land Lüneburg, im Hanseraum und im Kurfürstentum/Königreich Hannover vom 13. bis zum 19. Jahrhundert, vol. 1, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
Witthöft, Harald (1991). Die Markgewichte von Köln und Troyes im Spiegel der Regional- und Reichsgeschichte vom 11. bis ins 19. Jahrhundert, Historische Zeitschrift 253, 51-100.
Witthöft, Harald (1995). Mark I., in: Michael North (ed.), Von Aktie bis Zoll: Ein historisches Lexikon des Geldes, München: Beck, 234-235.
Woehlky, C.P., ed. (1885). Urkundenbuch des Bisthums Culm, vol. 3: Urkunden Nro. 642-964, Danzig: Theodor Bertling.
Ziesemer, Walther, ed. (1921). Das große Ämterbuch des Deutschen Ordens, Danzig: A.W. Kafemann.
68

SFB 649 Discussion Paper Series 2006
For a complete list of Discussion Papers published by the SFB 649, please visit http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de.
001 "Calibration Risk for Exotic Options" by Kai Detlefsen and Wolfgang K. Härdle, January 2006.
002 "Calibration Design of Implied Volatility Surfaces" by Kai Detlefsen and Wolfgang K. Härdle, January 2006.
003 "On the Appropriateness of Inappropriate VaR Models" by Wolfgang Härdle, Zdenk Hlávka and Gerhard Stahl, January 2006.
004 "Regional Labor Markets, Network Externalities and Migration: The Case of German Reunification" by Harald Uhlig, January/February 2006.
005 "British Interest Rate Convergence between the US and Europe: A Recursive Cointegration Analysis" by Enzo Weber, January 2006.
006 "A Combined Approach for Segment-Specific Analysis of Market Basket Data" by Yasemin Boztu and Thomas Reutterer, January 2006.
007 "Robust utility maximization in a stochastic factor model" by Daniel Hernández­Hernández and Alexander Schied, January 2006.
008 "Economic Growth of Agglomerations and Geographic Concentration of Industries - Evidence for Germany" by Kurt Geppert, Martin Gornig and Axel Werwatz, January 2006.
009 "Institutions, Bargaining Power and Labor Shares" by Benjamin Bental and Dominique Demougin, January 2006.
010 "Common Functional Principal Components" by Michal Benko, Wolfgang Härdle and Alois Kneip, Jauary 2006.
011 "VAR Modeling for Dynamic Semiparametric Factors of Volatility Strings" by Ralf Brüggemann, Wolfgang Härdle, Julius Mungo and Carsten Trenkler, February 2006.
012 "Bootstrapping Systems Cointegration Tests with a Prior Adjustment for Deterministic Terms" by Carsten Trenkler, February 2006.
013 "Penalties and Optimality in Financial Contracts: Taking Stock" by Michel A. Robe, Eva-Maria Steiger and Pierre-Armand Michel, February 2006.
014 "Core Labour Standards and FDI: Friends or Foes? The Case of Child Labour" by Sebastian Braun, February 2006.
015 "Graphical Data Representation in Bankruptcy Analysis" by Wolfgang Härdle, Rouslan Moro and Dorothea Schäfer, February 2006.
016 "Fiscal Policy Effects in the European Union" by Andreas Thams, February 2006.
017 "Estimation with the Nested Logit Model: Specifications and Software Particularities" by Nadja Silberhorn, Yasemin Boztu and Lutz Hildebrandt, March 2006.
018 "The Bologna Process: How student mobility affects multi-cultural skills and educational quality" by Lydia Mechtenberg and Roland Strausz, March 2006.
019 "Cheap Talk in the Classroom" by Lydia Mechtenberg, March 2006. 020 "Time Dependent Relative Risk Aversion" by Enzo Giacomini, Michael
Handel and Wolfgang Härdle, March 2006. 021 "Finite Sample Properties of Impulse Response Intervals in SVECMs with
Long-Run Identifying Restrictions" by Ralf Brüggemann, March 2006. 022 "Barrier Option Hedging under Constraints: A Viscosity Approach" by
Imen Bentahar and Bruno Bouchard, March 2006.
SFB 649, Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

023 "How Far Are We From The Slippery Slope? The Laffer Curve Revisited" by Mathias Trabandt and Harald Uhlig, April 2006.
024 "e-Learning Statistics ­ A Selective Review" by Wolfgang Härdle, Sigbert Klinke and Uwe Ziegenhagen, April 2006.
025 "Macroeconomic Regime Switches and Speculative Attacks" by Bartosz Makowiak, April 2006.
026 "External Shocks, U.S. Monetary Policy and Macroeconomic Fluctuations in Emerging Markets" by Bartosz Makowiak, April 2006.
027 "Institutional Competition, Political Process and Holdup" by Bruno Deffains and Dominique Demougin, April 2006.
028 "Technological Choice under Organizational Diseconomies of Scale" by Dominique Demougin and Anja Schöttner, April 2006.
029 "Tail Conditional Expectation for vector-valued Risks" by Imen Bentahar, April 2006.
030 "Approximate Solutions to Dynamic Models ­ Linear Methods" by Harald Uhlig, April 2006.
031 "Exploratory Graphics of a Financial Dataset" by Antony Unwin, Martin Theus and Wolfgang Härdle, April 2006.
032 "When did the 2001 recession really start?" by Jörg Polzehl, Vladimir Spokoiny and Ctlin Stric, April 2006.
033 "Varying coefficient GARCH versus local constant volatility modeling. Comparison of the predictive power" by Jörg Polzehl and Vladimir Spokoiny, April 2006.
034 "Spectral calibration of exponential Lévy Models [1]" by Denis Belomestny and Markus Reiß, April 2006.
035 "Spectral calibration of exponential Lévy Models [2]" by Denis Belomestny and Markus Reiß, April 2006.
036 "Spatial aggregation of local likelihood estimates with applications to classification" by Denis Belomestny and Vladimir Spokoiny, April 2006.
037 "A jump-diffusion Libor model and its robust calibration" by Denis Belomestny and John Schoenmakers, April 2006.
038 "Adaptive Simulation Algorithms for Pricing American and Bermudan Options by Local Analysis of Financial Market" by Denis Belomestny and Grigori N. Milstein, April 2006.
039 "Macroeconomic Integration in Asia Pacific: Common Stochastic Trends and Business Cycle Coherence" by Enzo Weber, May 2006.
040 "In Search of Non-Gaussian Components of a High-Dimensional Distribution" by Gilles Blanchard, Motoaki Kawanabe, Masashi Sugiyama, Vladimir Spokoiny and Klaus-Robert Müller, May 2006.
041 "Forward and reverse representations for Markov chains" by Grigori N. Milstein, John G. M. Schoenmakers and Vladimir Spokoiny, May 2006.
042 "Discussion of 'The Source of Historical Economic Fluctuations: An Analysis using Long-Run Restrictions' by Neville Francis and Valerie A. Ramey" by Harald Uhlig, May 2006.
043 "An Iteration Procedure for Solving Integral Equations Related to Optimal Stopping Problems" by Denis Belomestny and Pavel V. Gapeev, May 2006.
044 "East Germany's Wage Gap: A non-parametric decomposition based on establishment characteristics" by Bernd Görzig, Martin Gornig and Axel Werwatz, May 2006.
045 "Firm Specific Wage Spread in Germany - Decomposition of regional differences in inter firm wage dispersion" by Bernd Görzig, Martin Gornig and Axel Werwatz, May 2006.
SFB 649, Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

046 "Produktdiversifizierung: Haben die ostdeutschen Unternehmen den Anschluss an den Westen geschafft? ­ Eine vergleichende Analyse mit Mikrodaten der amtlichen Statistik" by Bernd Görzig, Martin Gornig and Axel Werwatz, May 2006.
047 "The Division of Ownership in New Ventures" by Dominique Demougin and Oliver Fabel, June 2006.
048 "The Anglo-German Industrial Productivity Paradox, 1895-1938: A Restatement and a Possible Resolution" by Albrecht Ritschl, May 2006.
049 "The Influence of Information Costs on the Integration of Financial Markets: Northern Europe, 1350-1560" by Oliver Volckart, May 2006.
SFB 649, Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

