BERLIN

SFB 6 4 9 E C O N O M I C R I S K

SFB 649 Discussion Paper 2008-029
Genetic Codes of Mergers, Post Merger Technology Evolution and Why Mergers Fail
Alexander Cuntz*
* Technische Universität Berlin, Germany
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".
http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de ISSN 1860-5664
SFB 649, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin

Genetic Codes of Mergers, Post Merger Technology Evolution and Why Mergers Fail
Alexander N. Cuntz, Berlin University of Technology
April 2008
Abstract
This paper addresses the key determinants of merger failure, in particular the role of innovation (post-merger performance) and technology (ex-ante selection) when rms decide to separate. After a brief review of the existing literature we introduce a model of process innovation where merged rms exibit intra-merger spillover of knowledge under dierent market regimes, depending on whether rms integrate vertically or horizontally. Secondly, we describe an ideal matching pattern for ex-ante selection criteria of technological partnering, abstracting from nancial market power issues. In a nal section we test the model implications for merger failure for M&A data from the US biotechnology industry in the 90s. We nd that post-merger innovation performance, in particular with large spillovers, increases the probability of survival, while we have no evidence that market power effects do so in long run. Additionally, we nd extensive technology sourcing activity by rms (already in the 90s) which contradicts the notion of failure and suits well the open innovation paradigm.
JEL-class. O30, L22, L25, C78, L65 keywords: merger failure, innovation performance, technology, matching, open innovation, biotechnology
Preliminary Draft. This project was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the collaborative research center 649 Economic Risk at Humboldt University, Berlin.
Chair of Innovation Economics, Institute for Technology & Management, also: Oce to the Federal Expert Commission Innovation and Research (EFI), alexander.cuntz@tu-berlin.de.
1

1 Introductory note
With the end of Daimler Chrysler decade another "world company" resolved back into its national components. As the Daimler CEO Zetsche states, ratios for the demerger where to be found in "constantly decreasing synergies within the merger", next to the capital market risks related to ongoing nancial transfers to support Chryslers lossy production. The former argument is mostly associated with supply side economies of scale and scope in the merged organization and production in the early merger stages. Anyhow, in our study we investigate that the post merger evolution of technology, i.e. technological synergies, may in the long run become a key aspect why former partners separate .
Increasing overall numbers of Multinational Enterprises (MNE), growing volumes of FDI and volumes of trade are persistent phenomena in the process of globalization (Narula and Zanfei 2003, OECD 2007). Multiple attempts have been made to construct ecient "world companies" that can master survival in global competition. International activities reect that rms are less focused on national resources of production than they were some years before. In particular, the strategic orientation of R&D processes has recently been subject to change (Blanc and Sierra 1999; Granstrand et al. 1993; von Zedtwitz and Gassmann 2002): Some rms opt for new business models such as Open Innovation (Hippel and Krogh 2006; West and Chesbrough 2006) which explicitly tries to capture and complement knowledge sources external to the rm to internal ones, as new combinations of technological components (e.g. Fleming 2001; Rosenkopf and Almeida 2003) may lead to successful further development in the invention process. Hence, these rms engage in screening and sensing (international) technology markets for new potential resources, and cooperate with partners e.g. through alliances, licensing or mergers and acquisitions (M&A). For the latter, the extent of search processes and subsequent selection of partner are partly subject to commitment and strategic beliefs of rms regarding the general value of technological capabilities (Langlois 1992) for success and their own absorptive capacity (Cohen and Levinthal 1990).
Next to non-technological arguments which clarify the original merger decision such as the managers Hybris motive or capital market based ratios (Mueller 2003; Gugler et al. 2006) for behaviour, there is a technological perspective for M&A activity (Hall 1988) where rms source for knowledge globally or locally, and, that not exclusively relates to eciencies in production or competition ef-
2

fects in post merger markets (Kleinert and Klodt 2002).
In contrast, we suggest that demerger decisions are grounded more deeply in vericable, rationalized facts like innovative or product market performance in the intraperiod of merger existence, and can also be to some extent referred and quantied by the evolution of technology, at least in high-tech industries, as it is well established that demerger may go along with the risk of negative stock market evaluation (e.g. Agrawal et al. 1992), organization reconstruction or even delisting (costs).
Merger targets and acquiring rms typically can be characterized e.g. by size, being small respectively large, or by construction, being vertical or horizontal. In terms of technology, partner choice and post merger innovative performance has been studied intensively by several contributions in the ultimate years: Most of the papers utilize technological relatedness / proximity between partners to describe the relation between technological portfolios of merging rms (for Germany: Hussinger 2005; for cross-boarder mergers: Hussinger and Frey 2006), a concept that brings together per rm (past) patent application counts and technology classication (Jae 1986).
Subsequent innovative performance has been another focus of recent research (Hagedoorn and Dyuster 2000; Colombo et al. 2005; sector-specic: Stephan and Gantumur 2007), e.g. by measuring post merger patent intensity, R&D personnel and R&D productivity. Other studies combine both approaches, the selection problem and ex post performance, or most recently investigate competition effects in regard to technological relatedness (Hussinger and Grimpe 2007).
Demerging unlocks resources, e.g. nancial constraints and limited human resources, for further search processes and internalization of external technological knowledge through (inhouse) spillovers (Jae 1986), hence demerger may not necessarily be caused by the lack of post merger innovative performance and insucient technology evolution, but may be motivated by completed, successful internalization of technological knowledge, in particular in high-tech industries. Needless to say, demerger must not bear the connotation of (technological or organizational) failure of a riskful merger experiment driven by mismanagement, but may also have a natural date of expiration.
Below discourse addresses the key determinants of merger failure. A second
3

question focuses on the particular role of innovation and technology when rms decide to separate. In section (2) we introduce a model of process innovation where merged rms exibit intra-merger spillover of knowledge under dierent market regimes, depending on whether rms integrate vertically or horizontally. Section (3) we test the model implications for merger failure for M&A data from the US biotechnology industry in the 90s, section (4) concludes. We nd that post-merger innovation performance, in particular with large spillovers, increases the probability of survival, while we have no evidence that market power eects do so in long run.
2 linkages between merger (failure) and innovation
When merger pairs form and possibly separate they run through a process of selection and a process of de-selection. To see what really drives these processes it is necessary to fully understand their motives and causes. The end of a merger is not necessarily the point in time when investigation should end.
Firstly, the selection process may be initiated by a variety of motives. Possibly, these may include individual pursuit of managements, increase in market power or maybe following technology sourcing motives e.g. to amplify a rms technological prole. The causes that nally govern the selection process may dier from original motives of the merger, as, in most cases, capital markets and a rms individual or relative1 nancial power on these markets may even change rational selection decision.
Secondly, the potential process of de-selection is much more complex to analyse as only one of the primary sources causing failure may lie in a posteriori misled selection process. General production performance, that is production synergies from post-merger economies of scale and scope, or when focusing on innovation performance, potential process and / or product innovation success, again, by increases in R&D eciency via scale and scope economies, via a reduction of substitutional research, or via intra-merger spillovers by mutual learning processes in the common labs that, for the case of process innovation, may have product quality-enhancing or production cost-reducing eects. Next to selection and performance causes of demerger, failure may be well intended and can be motivated i.e. by technological restructuring of a company. Still, other motives
1The balance between the acquisors and targets nancial power i.e. plays a role if the merger is a hostile takeover. Similarly, several acquisors may bid for an interesting target candidate.
4

to separate include traditionally unexpected failed, bad performance or drastic changes in the market environment itself2.

2.1 the role of genetic codes of technology and integration
choice: market dominance, post-merger performance
and merger failure
Grounded on the basic insights of the model from Kamien and Zang (1999, in the following KZ) we develop a two stage game in which a newly formed merger couple can perfom process innovations under dierent levels of market concentration. On the models rst stage the merger entity decides on common R&D investment, then, on a second stage it optimally sets prices and quantities for a given market structure. As all this happens in the post-merger phase, technological codes of merging partners are predened, that is exogenously given. Still, these codes dene the level of intra-merger spillovers due to the level of the partners individual (technological) experience, technological proximity of partners (Jae 1986) and common R&D eort of the merger couple (Kim 1998). Referencing on the absorptive capacity paradigma from Cohen and Levinthal (1990) KZ propose a representation of a rms eective R&D eort that incorporates absorptive capacity as a strategic variable, which we take here as predened and which we will review in the next section, into their research joint venture model. Specically, they propose that the i-th rms eective R&D eort X be represented by

Xi = i + (1 - i)(1 - j)ii1j-i.

(1)

In our post-merger scenario, given that partners invest symmetrically, the intramerger spillovers that additionally, with rate , empower the investment level x of the merger pair summarize to

X = x[1 + (1 - i)(1 - j)] = x

(2)

with i = j and x = 2i. i respectively j refers to each partners own R&D expenditure level or reduction in its unit production costs, with 0  i  1, 0  j  1 and 0    1. Now the exogenously given parameter  is the fraction of one partners R&D eort that virtually spills over to other partners R&D eorts. In the general joint venture literature it represents the involuntary
2These changes in framework conditions of the market maybe caused i.e. by disruptive technologies developed by a third party rm, changes in market regulation or unexpected shift of demand.

5

spillovers from a partners R&D activity that it has only a limited ability to curtail, such as the information disclosed when patents are granted, information provided in trade and scientic publications, information provided through reverse engineering, information disclosed through the migration of employees, suppliers, and customers, and industry-wide rumors and gossip. In our context, we re-interpret the parameter as a measure of technological proximity (Hussinger 2005) between merging partners that restricts or enhances well-intended, intra-merger spillovers, basically saying that partners with technologically closer competences can learn faster and more profound from each other as they are carriers of similar technological regimes (Nelson and Winter 1977; Marsili and Verspagen 2002) and most probably employ members of the same / a similar technological community (Rappa and Debackere 1992).

The term , on the other hand, refers to the endogenous control the i-th

partner can exert on the spillovers its R&D activity generates through the choice

of an R&D approach. A very narrow, rm-specic approach corresponds to  = 1

and generates no spillovers to others because the information it provides is to

some extent irrelevant to them, it can only hardly be decoded and learned. On

the other hand, it also limits the rms absorptive capacity. At the other extreme,

a totally non-specic approach, i.e. a basic approach, corresponds to  = 0

and generates the maximum spillover to others but also maximizes the rms

absorptive capacity for any level of its R&D spending. Again, as we treat  as

a non-strategic, exogenous parameter, each partners absorptive capacity (AC) is

predended, so that for partner i respectively j, with symmetric investment, it is

given that

ACi = (1 - i)ii

(3)

and
ACj = (1 - j)jj = (1 - j)ij .

(4)

In the merger context, absorptive capacities reect the individual potentials for successful technological integration of merging partners, and, hence, may oer a rst ex ante criteria for profound analysis on technological synergies developed in the post-merging innovation perfomance phase.

When solving the model recursively, we assume a simple, Cournot competition market model where the merger couple faces an inverse, linear demand function, p = a - Q, with an overall merger output of Q, given that a > Q  0. Furthermore, without loss of generality, we suppose a negative demand curve slope of -1.

6

The mergers prot function z as modelled by KZ compounds potential process innovation eects of eective investment reducing common marginal production costs C(Q, X) - from their initial level of A to somewhere below that level -, and an exponential, non-negative cost function for R&D eort3, C¯(R&D). More precisely, it resumes to

z = pQ - C(Q, X) - C¯(R&D) = pQ - [A - X]Q - 0.5x2,

(5)

with [A - X]  0 and  > 0.

Depending on the structure of the market z, z = [mon, duo], the equilibrium solutions of the game change. Let us suppose that horizontal mergers - more than vertical ones - are associated with larger, immediate market power, i.e. that rms merging horizontally may perform in a monopoly structure while vertical mergers compete with some third party in a duopoly. Then, for the former structure, solving the prot-maximization problem of the horizontally merging entity from equation (5) resolves to

max mon
x

=

1 4

(a

-

A)2

+

1 4

x[(

2

-

2)x +

2(a - A)]

with an optimal, common investment level x~mon of

(6)

x~mon = (a - A) 2 - 2

(7)

under monopoly pricing and quantities on the second stage, so that prots summarize to

mon(x~mon)

=

1 4

(a - A)2 + [(a - A)]2 2 - 2

(8)

Analogeously, under a duopoly scheme, with no spillovers to the third party rm

assumed, the prot-maximizing problem of a vertical merger pair on the rst

stage is

max duo
x

=

2 9

(a

-

A)2

+

2 9

x[(2

-

9 4

)x

+

2(a

-

A)].

(9)

Again, the optimal R&D eort x~duo derived from the F.O.C. is

x~duo

=

(a - A)

9 4



-

2

(10)

3Note that throughout the model it is assumed that dierent R&D approaches rely on similar R&D cost functions.

7

respectively, for maxmial prot

duo(x~duo)

=

2 9

(a

-

A)2

+

[(a - A)]2

9 4



-

2

.

(11)

It is easy to see (eqs. (8) and (11)) that prots under the monopoly scheme are somewhat higher, given identical parameters in both markets, than in a duopoly market, put dierently it is always the case mon(x~mon) > duo(x~duo). Anyhow, considering investment incentives under each market regime, x~z, it is interesting that even though potential amortization of process innovation eorts seem to be higher due to the larger scale of production as a duopolist, they are outweighed by the option of the monopoly pricing margin as a direct transfer mechanism of R&D costs to consumers4.

H 1: For an identical set of parameters [a, A, , ] in both market structures, the immediate eect of market power on prots is higher for horizontal merger than for rms merging vertically, given that above market structure - integration type - assumption holds. Hence, horizontal integration may decrease the risk of merger failure in the long-run while vertical integration generates a lower probability of survival.

We nd that generated prots from market power may crucially depend on the intra-merger spillover eects (i, j, ) on process innovations whatever type of merger one considers, when keeping all other parameters [a, A, ] xed. Then, it may be even the case that due to large spillovers the acquisor may wish to opt for a vertical rather than horizontal partnering rm / target as the market power effect is overpowered by the eectiveness of R&D investment on process innovation and, hence, drastic increases in prots. Conclusively, it will become important to elaborate on how merger pairs should be formed that maximize spillovers - if we abstract from the market integration issue-, and, hence, make common R&D eorts more eective and help increase prots from process innovations.

H2: For larger (smaller) values of , that is higher (lower) levels of intramerger spillovers, the eectiveness of R&D eort is enhanced (reduced) so that the altitude of process innovations and, hence, joint prots should increase (decrease). From a dynamic perspective, this may lower (increase) the probability of merger failure.
4These structural results are in the Schumpeterian line of reasoning that more concentrated markets lead to higher levels of innovation.

8

Dierent to the KZ model where rms set R&D approaches strategically for the purposes of successful joint venture in research on an additional stage of the model, we apply exogenously set R&D approaches as a key (technological) characteristic in the (strategic) selection process for nding the adequate merging partner, for a given technological proximity of partners. Firms with dierent R&D approaches are either high or low types, which in our model translates to broader, respectively narrow approaches (smaller or larger ). Basically, the selection process points towards certain, optimal patterns of matching and technology sourcing (Malerba and Orsenigo 1993) which we will investigate on in the following section.

2.2 positive assortative matching patterns: the role of genetic
codes of technology for merger selection and failure
Suppose, we have two types5, i > i and j > j, for each rm i and j as binary gender (either acquisors or targets) in a two-sided model with assortative matching (Legros and Newman 2007, in the following LN). Let I be the set of acquisors on one side of the market and let J be the set of targeted rms on the other. The description of a specic economy6 includes an assignment of individuals to types via maps  : I  P and  : J  A, where P and A are compact subsets of R. To simplify the exposition, we assume that I and J have the same cardinality. The joint R&D payo function of the matched merger pair is described by the level of spillover exibited due to common R&D eort (eq. (2)), so that the rm-specic utility maxmimization problem  for rm i in nding the optimal matching partner simplies to

(i, j, s) = max(1 - s)x
j ,s

(12)

s.t. s = ACj ACi + ACj

(13)

with the sharing rule s, 0  s  1, that is implicitely contracted by the predened

absorbtive capacities of each partner (eqs. (3) and (4)). The utility share rm i

gets from exibited spillovers is (1-s) while rm j gets a share of s. Obviously, for

5De facto we observe the discrete case with a continuum of types. 6Two further assumptions are generally made on matching models, namely (1) that the payo possibilities depend only on the types of the agents and not on their individual identities, and (2) the utility possibilities of the pair of agents do not depend on what other agents in the economy are doing, that is, there are no externalities across coalitions.

9

non-symmetric cases of ACs rms then prot very dierently from spillover eect inside the merger, when, from an evolutionary perspective7, i.e. the potentials to learn from each others technological competences vary. Put dierently, the dierence in the pace of learning may lead to an asymmetric technological integration success in short- or mid-term run that may be perceived - at least from the partner with minor AC potentials - as a minor level of technological synergies in individual, post-merging innovation performance while the higher AC rm may benet from this particular formation, even though product market prots from common, median process innovation altitude are assumed to remain unchanged in the long run8.

H3: With signicantly dierent absorptive capacities of merging partners sharing of exibited intra-merger spillovers is asymmetric as they learn at a dierent speed from each other, which may enforce merger failure in the (early or midterm) phases of technological integration.

Ideally, the selection process of merging rms should lead to a positive assor-

tative matching (PAM) pattern, that is high (low) types will match with high

(low) types, as this should maximize spillovers and, hence, altitude of process

innovation. This is the case if rm i's utility function from exibited spillover

(eqs. (12) and (13)), and analogously rm j's, are increasing (or more precisely,

non-decreasing) in type, in other words, if matching with a broader R&D ap-

proach partner this should increase the joint spillover payo. So given that below

equations hold

1(i, j, s)  0

(14)

1(i, j, s) = (s - 1)(1 - j)x - s x [1 + (1 - i)(1 - j)]  0 (15)

and

2(i, j, s)  0

(16)

2(i, j, s) = (s - 1)(1 - i)x - s x [1 + (1 - i)(1 - j)]  0, (17)
7Rather than focusing on prot-maxmizing product market orientation, this perspective considers the evolution of merger cooperation and its implications for post-merger innovation performance.
8Please note that our application of the KZ model does not explicitly consider a specic post-merger phases of technological integration activity. Still, it may be quite useful to think of i.e. post-merger period of re-organization of R&D facilities, general learning on mutual skills and developing a set-up of a common R&D agenda.

10

individual payo functions are type increasing as

s > 0,

(18)

if, and only if

11

1

-

j



ln(

x 2

)

,

1

-

i



ln(

x 2

)

(19)

which basically requests that a certain level of common R&D eort is made for

spillover eects to unfold fully inside the merger.

Additionally, sucient conditions for PAM according to the generalized increasing

dierence conditions suggested by LN must satisfy

12(i, j, s)  0

(20)

12(i, j, s) = -(s-1)x+s x [(1 - i) + (1 - j)]-s x[1+(1-i)(1-j)]  0,
(21)

and

13(i, j, s)  0

(22)

13(i, j, s) = s (1 - j)x - s x[1 + (1 - i)(1 - j)]  0.

(23)

If eqs. (18) and (19) hold, then it easy to show that s  0. Generally speaking, condition (20) secures type-type complementarity as commonly used in matching models, while condition (22) secures an additional type-payo complementarity that guarantees PAM, even in those cases with type-related, limited (or non-) transferability of utilities where agents may be limited in the bidding competition for the higher type partner.

In our context, the implications from the ideal PAM result suggest that for the technology sourcing rm searching for the right partner, technologically most proximate rms with more narrow R&D approaches and rms with broader R&D approaches should match. Technologically-driven merger selection whose success or failure crucially depends on post-merger innovation performance must consider the potential eects of spillovers as well as the aspect of sharing / absorbing these eects in the integration phase.

11

3 testing

3.1 data description

In order to test the derived hypotheses H1-3 we develop a data set of 3804 M&A deals in the US biotechnology sector, as a high-tech and innovation-driven industry, for the period from 1990 to 2000, excluding cross-boarder transactions, and also well before international stock crisis right after the turn of the century. Additionally, we explicitely focus on those deals in the THOMPSON c SDC Platinum M&A data bank where full legal ownership changed from target to aquiror, that is i.e. 100 % stakes were transferred. The data supplies date of acquisition, industry classication of targets, respectively acquisors, and some general information on primary business activities of both parties. 44 of these deals could be identied as being cases of de-merger for the observed period of time. The rate of failure may seem too low and may contradict other studies on the issue (see for example Porter (1987) who assumes about 50% of mergers to fail) at rst sight, but as we assumed that de-merging was present when targets re-appeared9 on the M&A market for technology after being acquised in the rst place, numbers become more reasonable. Most probably, we still may have a certain bias in our data as we solely considers divesture cases where the re-acquised target still had some technological value for others, and we cannot identify those merger failures e.g. were the merger was delisted or even went bankrupt. Figure 1 presents the survival time of these failure cases for the biotechnology industry in comparison to merger life cycles we found in other US high-tech sectors. Table 1 summarizes the biotechnology sample used in the next section.

vertical mergers

horizontal overall no. mergers

failure cases

31

13

44

survival cases 2632 1128 3760

Table 1: Descriptive statistics of US biotechnology domestic mergers (1990-2000) sample. Horizontal merger if target and acquiror have identical SIC / industry class., vertical formation is otherwise assumed.
The cases of merger failure identied were supplemented by a sample of surviving mergers that was drafted randomly, and, both are matched to a separate, extensive patent analysis of 68 companys patent portfolios with USPTO patent data. For the latter analysis we exclusively focused on (US) patent applications -
9It is assumed that with the second transaction date the failing merger ends.
12

Figure 1: Life cycle / survival time of failed domestic mergers in the US biotechnology, electronics, computer and communication industries, 1990-2000.

as an indicator of the present margin of a rms innovation activity and the rms prole of central technological competences - and, we also assumed a constant depreciation rate of knowledge of .15 when calculating actual patent stocks of each company. Each individual application is assigned to a technology class according to the International Patent Classication (IPC) that covers eight dierent technology elds, A-H, and an extensive sub-categorization where, for the purpose of our analysis, we applied the 4-digit level. In order to control for the importance of the individual patent classes for the rm the percentage of the rms total patent application stock is used rather than absolute numbers. Relative stocks in each sub-category then map the conclusive technological prole / vector of each rm. Technological proximity  between two rms i and j is dened as the angular separation or uncentered correlation measure. Based on their technology vectors Fi and Fj technological relatedness is calculated as

 = FiFj (Fi Fj)(FiFj)

(24)

with 0    1. Additionally, we measure the narrowness / broadness of R&D approaches  of

13

a rm i by its entropy regarding specic scientic elds l (Grupp 1997), that is a compound measure for concentration of a company's innovation activities in terms of broadness and intensity

i = - pli ln pli,
l

(25)

where pli is the share of activities of i in patent class sub-category l, given the

secondary condition that plk = 1 holds. Hence, in the case that activities are
l
concentrated in only one IPC eld the entropy index is i = 0, while for an

equidistribution of shares in all relevant subcategories the entropy level simplies

to

i

=

-

ln(

1 l

).

3.2 estimation and results
For testing our merger survival hypotheses we use a Cox proportional hazard model that estimates the probability of survival past time t. It also has the property that it leaves the baseline hazard unparameterized h0(t), that is there is no assumption about the shape of the hazard over time. This semiparametric model, with coeents k and variables xu, is of the general form

h(t|x) = h0(t) exp(kxu)

(26)

Furthermore, we integrate dynamic measures for rates of change (pre- vs. postmerger perfomance10) in absolute numbers of patents and in joint entropy of the merger pairs [entro-rate; patnum-rate], as covariates exponentially varying over time. All other static variables [sic-market; proxi; entro-di; both-entropy] are treated as xed in the model. After running the estimation (table 2), we test the proportional hazard assumptions based on Schoenfeld residuals (see appendix, table 3) to secure the general validity / non-violation of the global model.

Estimation results suggest that we have no evidence that market power / market relatedness eects play a signicant role for demerger [sic-market]. That is saying, matching vertically - having a dierent SIC industry classication does not restrict the probability of survival, so H1 can be rejected. This suits well the notion that the eect itself may be a more immediate than long-term one. Alternatively, the above assumption on market power - integration type that
10Innovation performance for failure cases is measured for the period of merger duration and for a similar period ex ante, while for non-failure cases we observe four-years performance ex ante including the merger birthdate, respectively ex post.

14

_t rh
proxi sic-market entro-di both-entropy entro-rate patnum-rate t entro-rate patnum-rate

Coef.
-3.018952 .0001819 .3539174 .1228839 24.19165 -4.511153
-3.156823 .5596401

Std. Err.
1.09849 .0002688 .5812657 .2605835 21.30897 2.044494
2.938956 .2747942

Haz. Ratio
.0488524 1.000182 1.424637 1.130753 3.21e+10 .0109858
.0425607 1.750042

N = 34, time at risk = 46,578, 2 = 20.96,  = 95% conf. interval

Table 2: semiparametric Cox proportional hazard model

forms the basis for H1 may be violated. For H2 the evidence is much harder to grasp fully as the level of spillovers depends on the common broadness of R&D approaches [both-entropy] and technological proximity of merging partners [proxi]. Partly, it must be rejected as entropy measures have no signicant impact on hazard rates, even when we adjust for technological proximity. On the other hand, proximity of partners seems to reduce the separation risk as more proximate merger pairs have a hazard of failure that is only about 5 % of the hazard for those who have very technologically distant competence proles. Intuitively, this results suggest that proximity is enhancing intra-merger knowledge spillovers but it maybe also attributed to some extent to an increase of R&D eencies inside the merger where similar competences, and hence, R&D resources - clearing of substitutional research - are refocused on existing complementary or new elds of R&D. Hence, H2 is, at least partly, satised but still needs further investigation. Asymmetry in absorbtive capacities has no signicant impact on hazard rates, so that H3 must be rejected. As asymmetry [entro-di] is an ex ante criteria with only early integration stage inuence it is of minor importance for long-term failure decisions. Anyhow, lets keep in mind that some of the criteria of selection seem to be essential for the separation process.

Turning to the more post-merger performance orientated criteria, indicators [entro-rate; patnum-rate] suggest that changes in joint entropy are not signicant while the eect of absolute patent application number rates is somewhat puzzling. If we treat the rate as a xed variable in the model we get the general notion that a good innovation performance, indicated by an (100%) increase in applications, should reduce the risk of failure, that is the relative hazard is only 1%. Oppo-

15

sitely, if we assume the variable to vary over time, as we really should expect, the hazard for high-patenting mergers is about 75% higher than the hazard of a minor performance pair. With respect to the data context here (our denition of failure cases) it may be the case that high-performance becomes an indicator of a successful absorption process of the partners technological competences where failure is only a strategic re-orientation of management. The nalization of such a technological sourcing proceedure in the data contradicts the commonly acknowledged notion of bad innovation performance as a cause for failure.
4 conclusive remarks Federal or European policies of merger control have been mostly concerned with protecting consumer rents from post merger reaping of extra prots from increased market power. If we consider the economic logic of technology sourcing this view may well be short-sighted. Given that mergers are expected to be temporary constructs internalizing technology, and, can be identied ex ante by the authorities, short-term product market prots should not be the only decision principle. Long-term macro eects for sustainable growth in the whole industry that are driven by successful technological change via spillover and increasing innovation may overcompensate the latter eects for consumers. Similarly, a broader evaluation scheme by stock market analyst can now turn out to be positive, with respect to the technological potential for future rm growth enhanced by demerger. However, the original merger partner choice, whether technologically proximate rms are selected or not, and the continuing analysis of post-merger performance, based on the revealed patterns from Hypotheses (2), should have an impact on rm selection itself and, possibly, stay or exit strategies inserted by managers.
16

5 appendix

proxi sic-market entro-di both-entropy entro-rate patnum-rate entro-rate patnum-rate global test

rho
-0.56779 0.44505 0.37359 0.31318 0.05758 0.15558 -0.08776 -0.19614

chi2
7.00 6.34 5.94 2.69 0.07 0.32 0.17 0.54
15.53

df
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
8

Prob>chi2
0.0082 0.0118 0.0148 0.1010 0.7955 0.5690 0.6793 0.4637
0.0496

Table 3: hazard assumptions global test by Schoenfeld residuals

17

6 bibliography
Agrawal, A., Jae, J. and Mandelker, G. (1992), The post-merger performance of acquiring rms: A re-examination of an anomaly, in: Journal of Finance, vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 1605-1621.
Blanc, H. and Sierra, C. (1999), The internationalisation of R&D by multinationals: a trade-o between external and internal proximity, in: Cambridge Journal of Economics, vol. 23, pp.187-206.
Chesbrough, H., Vanhaverbeke, W. and West, J. (2006), Open Innovation: A research agenda, in: Chesbrough, H., Vanhaverbeke, W. and West, J. (Eds.), Open Innovation: Researching a New Paradigm, chap. 14, Oxford University Press.
Cohen, W. and Levinthal, D. (1990), Absorptive Capacity: A New Perspective on Learning and Innovation, in: Administrative Science Quarterly, vol. 35, pp. 128-152.
Colombo, M., Cassiman, B., Garrone, P. and Veugelers, R. (2005), The impact of M&A on the R&D process: An empirical analysis of the role of technologicaland market-relatedness, in: Research Policy, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 195-220.
Fleming, L. (2001), Recombinant Uncertainty in Technological Search, in: Management Science, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 117-132.
Granstrand, O., Håkanson, L. and Sjölander, S. (1993), Internationalization of R&D - a survey of some recent research, in: Research Policy, vol. 22, no. 5-6, pp. 413-430.
Grupp, H. (1997), Messung und Erklärung des technischen Wandels. Grundzüge einer empirischen Innovationsökonomik, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag.
Gugler, K., Mueller, D. and Yurtoglu, B. (2006), The Determinants of Merger Waves, WZB - Markets and Politics Working Paper No. SP II 2006-01.
Hagedoorn, J. and Duysters, G. (2000), The Eect of Mergers and Acquisitions on the Technological Performance of Companies in a High-tech Environ-
18

ment, Research Memoranda 010, Maastricht Economic Research Institute on Innovation and Technology.
Hall, B. (1988), The Eect of Takeover Activity on Corporate Research and Development, in: Auerbach, A. (ed.), The Economic Eects of Takeover Activity, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hussinger, K. (2005), Did Concentration on Core Competencies Drive Merger and Acquisition Activities in the 1990s?, ZEW Discussion Paper No. 05-41.
Hussinger, K. and Frey, R. (2006), The Role of Technology in M&As: A Firm Level Comparison of Cross-Border and Domestic Deals, ZEW Discussion Paper No. 06-069.
Hussinger, K. and Grimpe, C. (2007), Pre-empting Technology Competition Through Firm Acquisitions, ZEW Discussion Paper No. 07-027.
Jae, A. (1986), Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R&D: Evidence from Firm Patents, Prots and Market Value, in: American Economic Review, vol. 26, pp. 1023-46.
Kamien, M., Zang, I. (1999), Meet me Halfway: Research Joint Venture and Absorptive Capacity, in: International Journal of Industrial Organization, vol. 18, pp. 995-1012.
Kim, L. (1998), Crisis Construction and Organizational Learning: Capability Building in Catching-up at Hyundai Motor, in: Organization Science, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 506-521.
Kleinert, J. and Klodt, H. (2002), Fusionswellen und ihre Ursachen, in: Fusionen, Franz, W., Ramser, J. and Stadler, M. (eds.), Tübingen, pp. 26-49.
Langlois, R. (1992), Transaction-cost Economics in Real Time, in: Industrial cooperate change, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 99-127.
Legros, P., Newman, A. (2007), Beauty is a Beast, Frog is a Prince: Assortative Matching with Nontransferabilities, in: Econometrica, vol. 75, no. 4, pp.1073-1102.
19

Mueller, D. (2003), The Finance Literature on Mergers: A Critical Survey, in: M. Waterson (ed.), Competition, Monopoly and Corporate Governance, Edward Elgar, pp. 161-205.
OECD (2007), Moving Up the Value Chain: Staying Competitive in the Global Economy, OECD Paris.
Malerba, F. and Orsenigo, L. (1993), Technological regimes and rm behaviour, in: Industrial and Corporate Change, vol. 2, pp. 45-71.
Marsili, O. and Verspagen, B., (2002), Technology and the dynamics of industrial structures: an empirical mapping of Dutch manufacturing, in: Industrial Corporations and Change, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 791-815.
Narula, R. and Zanfei, A. (2004), The international dimension of innovation, in: Fagerberg, J., Mowery, D. and Nelson, R. (eds.), Handbook of Innovation, Oxford University Press.
Nelson, R. and Winter, S. (1977), In search of useful theory of innovation, in: Research Policy, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 36-76.
Porter, M. (1987), From competitive Advantage of Corporate Strategy, in: Harvard Business Review, vol. 65, no.3, pp. 43-59.
Rappa, M. and Debackere, K. (1992), Technological communities and the diusion of knowledge, in: Journal of R&D Management, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 209-220.
Rosenkopf, L. and Almeida, P. (2003), Overcoming Local Search Through Alliances and Mobility, in: Management Science, vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 751-766.
Stephan, A. and Gantumur, T. (2007), Mergers Acquisitions and Innovation Performance in the Telecommunications Equipment Industry, CRC 649 "Economic Risk" discussion paper.
Valentini, G. (2004), Mergers and Acquisitions and Technological Performance, mimeo, IESE Business School.
20

Von Hippel, E. and von Krogh, G. (2006), Free Revealing and the PrivateCollective Model for Innovation Incentives, in: R&D Management, vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 291-302.
von Zedtwitz, M., Gassmann, O. (2002), Market versus technology drive in R&D internationalization: four dierent patterns of managing research and development, in: Research Policy, vol. 31, pp. 569-588.
21

SFB 649 Discussion Paper Series 2008

For a complete list of Discussion Papers published by the SFB 649, please visit http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de.

001 "Testing Monotonicity of Pricing Kernels" by Yuri Golubev, Wolfgang

Härdle and Roman Timonfeev, January 2008.

002 "Adaptive pointwise estimation in time-inhomogeneous time-series

models" by Pavel Cizek, Wolfgang Härdle and Vladimir Spokoiny,

January 2008.

003 "The Bayesian Additive Classification Tree Applied to Credit Risk

Modelling" by Junni L. Zhang and Wolfgang Härdle, January 2008.

004 "Independent Component Analysis Via Copula Techniques" by Ray-Bing

Chen, Meihui Guo, Wolfgang Härdle and Shih-Feng

Huang, January

2008.

005 "The Default Risk of Firms Examined with Smooth Support Vector

Machines" by Wolfgang Härdle, Yuh-Jye Lee, Dorothea Schäfer

and Yi-Ren Yeh, January 2008.

006 "Value-at-Risk and Expected Shortfall when there is long range

dependence" by Wolfgang Härdle and Julius Mungo, Januray 2008.

007 "A Consistent Nonparametric Test for Causality in Quantile" by

Kiho Jeong and Wolfgang Härdle, January 2008.

008 "Do Legal Standards Affect Ethical Concerns of Consumers?" by Dirk

Engelmann and Dorothea Kübler, January 2008.

009 "Recursive Portfolio Selection with Decision Trees" by Anton Andriyashin,

Wolfgang Härdle and Roman Timofeev, January 2008.

010 "Do Public Banks have a Competitive Advantage?" by Astrid Matthey,

January 2008.

011 "Don't aim too high: the potential costs of high aspirations" by Astrid

Matthey and Nadja Dwenger, January 2008.

012 "Visualizing exploratory factor analysis models" by Sigbert Klinke and

Cornelia Wagner, January 2008.

013 "House Prices and Replacement Cost: A Micro-Level Analysis" by Rainer

Schulz and Axel Werwatz, January 2008.

014 "Support Vector Regression Based GARCH Model with Application to

Forecasting Volatility of Financial Returns" by Shiyi Chen, Kiho Jeong and

Wolfgang Härdle, January 2008.

015 "Structural Constant Conditional Correlation" by Enzo Weber, January

2008.

016 "Estimating Investment Equations in Imperfect Capital Markets" by Silke

Hüttel, Oliver Mußhoff, Martin Odening and Nataliya Zinych, January

2008.

017 "Adaptive Forecasting of the EURIBOR Swap Term Structure" by Oliver

Blaskowitz and Helmut Herwatz, January 2008.

018 "Solving, Estimating and Selecting Nonlinear Dynamic Models without

the Curse of Dimensionality" by Viktor Winschel and Markus Krätzig,

February 2008.

019 "The Accuracy of Long-term Real Estate Valuations" by Rainer Schulz,

Markus Staiber, Martin Wersing and Axel Werwatz, February 2008.

020 "The Impact of International Outsourcing on Labour Market Dynamics in

Germany" by Ronald Bachmann and Sebastian Braun, February 2008.

021 "Preferences for Collective versus Individualised Wage Setting" by Tito

Boeri and Michael C. Burda, February 2008.

SFB 649, Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

022 "Lumpy Labor Adjustment as a Propagation Mechanism of Business Cycles" by Fang Yao, February 2008.
023 "Family Management, Family Ownership and Downsizing: Evidence from S&P 500 Firms" by Jörn Hendrich Block, February 2008.
024 "Skill Specific Unemployment with Imperfect Substitution of Skills" by Runli Xie, March 2008.
025 "Price Adjustment to News with Uncertain Precision" by Nikolaus Hautsch, Dieter Hess and Christoph Müller, March 2008.
026 "Information and Beliefs in a Repeated Normal-form Game" by Dietmar Fehr, Dorothea Kübler and David Danz, March 2008.
027 "The Stochastic Fluctuation of the Quantile Regression Curve" by Wolfgang Härdle and Song Song, March 2008.
028 "Are stewardship and valuation usefulness compatible or alternative objectives of financial accounting?" by Joachim Gassen, March 2008.
029 "Genetic Codes of Mergers, Post Merger Technology Evolution and Why Mergers Fail" by Alexander Cuntz, April 2008.
SFB 649, Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

