BERLIN

SFB 6 4 9 E C O N O M I C R I S K

SFB 649 Discussion Paper 2009-054
Depression Econometrics: A FAVAR Model of
Monetary Policy During the Great Depression
Pooyan Amir Ahmadi* Albrecht Ritschl**
* Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany ** London School of Economics, United Kingdom
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".
http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de ISSN 1860-5664
SFB 649, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin

Depression Econometrics:
A FAVAR Model of Monetary Policy During the Great Depression

Pooyan Amir Ahmadi
Department of Economics Humboldt University of Berlin

Albrecht Ritschl
Department of Economic History London School of Economics and CEPR

October 2009

Abstract
The prominent role of monetary policy in the U.S. interwar depression has been conventional wisdom since Friedman and Schwartz [1963]. This paper presents evidence on both the surprise and the systematic components of monetary policy between 1929 and 1933. Doubts surrounding GDP estimates for the 1920s would call into question conventional VAR techniques. We therefore adopt the FAVAR methodology of Bernanke, Boivin, and Eliasz [2005], aggregating a large number of time series into a few factors and inserting these into a monetary policy VAR. We work in a Bayesian framework and apply MCMC methods to obtain the posteriors. Employing the generalized sign restriction approach toward identification of Amir Ahmadi and Uhlig [2008], we find the effects of monetary policy shocks to have been moderate. To analyze the systematic policy component, we back out the monetary policy reaction function and its response to aggregate supply and demand shocks. Results broadly confirm the Friedman/Schwartz view about restrictive monetary policy, but indicate only moderate effects. We further analyze systematic policy through conditional forecasts of key time series at critical junctures, taken with and without the policy instrument. Effects are again quite moderate. Our results caution against a predominantly monetary interpretation of the Great Depression.
JEL codes: N12, E37, E47, E52, C11, C53
Keywords: Great Depression, monetary policy, Friedman/Schwartz hypothesis,
Bayesian FAVAR, Dynamic factor model, Gibbs sampling
We are indebted to Chris Sims, Mark Watson, Harald Uhlig, Samad Sarferaz and Henning Weber for fruitful discussions. We also thank seminar and conference participants for helpful input. Financial support by DFG under SFB649 at Humboldt University of Berlin is gratefully acknowledged. Part of this research was conducted while the first author was visiting at Princeton University. The usual disclaimer applies. Contact: amir@wiwi.hu-berlin.de; a.o.ritschl@lse.ac.uk.

1 Introduction
Beginning with the seminal contribution of Friedman and Schwartz [1963], the Great Depression has traditionally been associated with restrictive monetary policy. In 1928, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, then the leading institution in U.S. monetary policy, responded to the stock market boom with interest rate hikes from 3.5 % in January to 5 % in September. Between July and October of 1929, it raised its discount rate by another percentage point. After the October stock market crash, the discount rate was reduced in several steps to reach 1.5 % in June 1931. However, given the rapid decline in price levels, ex-post real interest rates remained high. Monetary authorities also failed to intervene in the banking crisis that unfolded beginning in December of 1930, and interest rates increased again after Britain's departure from the Gold Standard in October, 1931.
This paper is about submitting the role of monetary policy in the Great Depression hypothesis to empirical test. This task is a complex one, as several different channels of monetary policy transmission during the depression have been proposed. The strongest form of the paradigm, expounded by Schwartz [1981], states that both the initial recessionary impulse and the later deepening of the recession were largely caused by the Federal Reserve. The original position of Friedman and Schwartz [1963] centered more strongly on the role of monetary policy in deepening the slump. This weaker version of the monetary paradigm is also consistent with the emphasis placed on bank panics by Bernanke [1983,1995] and others. Bernanke's research focused on financial channels of monetary policy transmission, emphasizing the role of information asymmetries and participation constraints in debtor/creditor relations, as well as of debt deflation. Bernanke and Carey [1996] also looked at nominal wage stickiness as an alternative mechanism of monetary policy transmission during the depression.
In the light of these various proposed transmission mechanisms, traditional VAR analysis soon reaches its limits, as it only allows for a small number of time series to model the pertinent dynamics of the money/income causation. One alternative that has been pursued in the recent literature was to obtain
1

counterfactuals from well-specified DSGE models of the Great Depression that focus on one specific monetary transmission mechanism. Bordo, Erceg, and Evans [2000] specify a DSGE model with sticky wages, finding evidence in favor of a nominal wage rigidity channel of monetary policy transmission. Christiano, Motto and Rostagno [2003] propose a DSGE model with a permanent increase in liquidity preference during the depression, and argue that given this preference shift, easy monetary policy a la Friedman and Schwartz would have mitigated most of the slump.
However, non-monetary interpretations using DSGE techniques seem to have worked equally well in modeling the interwar depression. Cole and Ohanian [2005] specified a model of collective wage bargaining to argue that real wage rigidity under the New Deal prevented a more complete recovery from the depression after 1933. Combining monopolistic product markets with search frictions in the labor market, Ebell and Ritschl [2007] argued that the Great Depression could be viewed as an equilibrium shift, induced by high wage policies under the Hoover administration. In a model of international business cycle transmission in the Great Depression, Cole, Ohanian, and Leung [2005] examined monetary policy and productivity shocks alongside each other, and found only a minor role for monetary shocks in explaining the slump. Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan [2007] modeled the Great Depression using a neoclassical business cycle accounting framework with frictions. On the other extreme of the spectrum of non-monetary models, Harrison and Weder [2005] calibrated a sunspot model of investor behavior, and found strong evidence for an investment-led downturn that was unrelated to monetary policy. Hence, existing research offers a whole menu of interpretations which all seem consistent with the data, although they partly exclude each other.
This is what motivates the approach taken in the present paper. Compared to existing research on the Great Depression, we aim to impose less structure and at the same time analyze a richer dataset. We start out from parsimonious yet informative prior assumptions on the effects of monetary policy. We gear our estimation toward exploiting the information on the common components of business cycle movements in a large cross section of time series. To this end, we employ the factor-augmented vector autoregression (FAVAR) techniques in-
2

troduced into monetary policy by, among others, Bernanke and Boivin [2003], Stock and Watson [2005] and Bernanke, Boivin, and Eliasz [2005] (henceforth BBE). The idea behind this can be interpreted as augmenting the information content in a VAR by a two-step procedure. In a first step, the common dynamics in a large panel of time series are identified using dynamic factor model (DFM) techniques as developed by Geweke [1977] and Sims and Sargent [1977]. In a second step, the causality between a properly chosen policy instrument and some representative measure of economic activity is examined in a traditional VAR, including the factors as the relevant description of the underlying economic dynamics. Estimation is either in two steps, employing principal-component techniques for DFM part and Maximum Likelihood for the FAVAR, or simultaneous by Bayesian likelihood methods or suitable numerical approximations. In the present paper, we adhere to the Bayesian approach, which allows us to exploit the information on the observables in the VAR specification more completely.
Both traditional VAR analysis and FAVARs for U.S. data have obtained significant but quantitatively small effects of monetary policy on output. In a longterm study on the U.S. since the 1930s, Sims [1999] finds that monetary policy on average explains around 12 % of forecast error variance in output. Using the FAVAR technique, Amir Ahmadi and Uhlig [2008] report a variance explanation of less than 14 % for industrial output and roughly 10 % for unemployment, order flows, and capacity utilization, evaluated at a 48-months horizon.
VAR evidence on the Great Depression is sparse. Ritschl and Woitek [2000] employ time-varying techniques on four different specifications of the monetary transmission mechanism and find that monetary policy explains less than 5 % of output forecast error variance. They also find the forecasting performance of their VARs to be poor. This suggests that a traditional monetary policy VAR, run with the imperfect aggregate data available for the interwar period, might not be able to capture the business cycle dynamics of the Great Depression very well. Given the limitations to data quality in the interwar period, working in a FAVAR framework thus seems particularly promising, as the underlying DFM aggregates information included in a large panel of disaggregate time series. The statistical aggregation procedure implicit in the FAVAR presents an alternative to historical monetary statistics and reconstructed national accounts with their
3

unavoidable interpolations and inaccuracies. The aim of the present paper is to track the effects of U.S. monetary policy
during the interwar years in the data-rich environment provided by the FAVAR approach, and to evaluate them against the postwar evidence collected in previous studies. The Friedman/Schwartz [1963] hypothesis on the monetary causes of the Great Depression would suggest that the effects of interwar monetary policy were significant and certainly larger than the rather modest estimates obtained for postwar U.S. data. Any findings that suggest only minor effects of monetary policy would then have to be interpreted as cautioning against a primarily monetary explanation of the Great Depression.
The task at hand is a double one. On the one hand, we follow the standard approach to policy analysis in a VAR, calculating impulse response sequences and forecast error variance decompositions under identifying assumptions about the correlation structure of the VAR residuals. The implicit assumption behind this approach is the neutrality of anticipated monetary policy changes, i.e. of movements along the central bank's reaction function. On the other, we also attempt to trace possible systematic effects of monetary policy, which would be present under a wider set of frictions that allow for (however short-lived) deviations from non-neutrality of movements along the monetary policy reaction function itself. In a VAR, such systematic effects would be identified through Granger causality of monetary policy for other variables of interest. We implement this by taking Bayesian forecasts of key economic indicators from FAVARs with and without past realizations of the policy instrument. Improvements of the forecast in the presence of the policy instrument relative to the baseline would then be an indication of possible systematic policy effects, while the sign of the correction would indicate the expansionary or recessionary stance of systematic policy. This is the closest we can get to providing a test of monetary policy effects in the spirit of Friedman and Schwartz' [1963] hypothesis. Furthermore we identify the reaction of different policy instruments to aggregate supply and demand shocks tracing the systematic reaction of the monetary authority to changes in the economy.
We proceed in several steps. Section (2) presents the basic econometric framework, which closely follows the Bayesian version of BBE's FAVAR model. Sec-
4

tion (3) describes the estimation procedure and Section (4) discusses the model fit. Section (5) provides results for the stochastic component of monetary policy, obtaining shocks from the generalized sign restriction identification approach described in Amir Ahmadi and Uhlig [2008]. Section (6) analyzes the policy reaction to identified aggregate supply and demand shocks. Section (7) looks at possible effects of systematic monetary policy, examining conditional forecasts of key time series with and without the policy instrument at critical junctures. Section (8) concludes.

2 The Model

The key idea behind dynamic factor models is to provide a parsimonious rep-

resentation of the comovements in a large set of cross-sectional data by only a

limited number of unobserved latent factors. The dynamic factor model (hence-

forth DFM) allows dynamics in both the common component - represented by

these factors and their respective factor loadings - and the variable-specific id-

iosyncratic component. The factor-augmented vector autoregression (henceforth

FAVAR) model is a hybrid between a DFM and the standard structural VAR

model:

a

joint

VAR

is

specified

for

some

series

of

interest

f

y t

and

some

factors

f

c t

that

are

extracted

from

a

large

panel

of

informational

time

series

Xtc.

The

working hypothesis of the FAVAR model is that while a narrow set of variables

fty, notably the policy instrument of the central bank, are perfectly observable

and have pervasive effects on the economy, the underlying dynamics of the econ-

omy are less perfectly observable, and hence a VAR in just a few key variables

would potentially suffer from omitted variable bias. As increasing the size of

a VAR is impractical due to problems of dimensionality, the FAVAR approach

aims to extract the common dynamics from a wide set of informational indicator series Xtc, and to include these in the VAR, represented by a small number of factors ftc. This approach is well suited for structural analysis such as impulse response analysis and variance decomposition (in particular for the problem at

hand). For the estimation procedure the model has to be cast in a state-space

representation. The informational variables Xtc included in the observation equation are assumed to be driven by observable variables with pervasive effects on

5

the economy (e.g. the central bank's policy instrument), fty, a small number of unobservable common factors, ftc, which together represent the main "driving forces" of the economy, and an idiosyncratic component etc, i.e.

Xtc = c ftc + y fty + etc

(2.1)

etc  N(0, Re)

(2.2)

Here  f and y denote the matrix of factor loadings of the factors and the policy

instrument, with dimension [Nc × Kc] and [Nc × Ny], respectively. The error term etc has mean 0 and a variance/covariance matrix R, which is assumed to be diagonal. Hence the error terms of the observable variables are mutually

uncorrelated.

The FAVAR state equation represents the joint dynamics of factors and the observable policy variables ( ftc, fty).







ftc

f

y t

 = b(L) 

ftc-1 fty-1

 + Atf

(2.3)

utf = Atf utf  N(0, Qu)

(2.4) (2.5)

where

utf

is

the

time

t

reduced

form

shock

and

f
t

the

time

t

structural

shock,

with the contemporaneous relations represented through matrix A. The dimen-

sions are [K × 1], [K × 1] and [K × K] respectively, where K = Kc + Ny denotes

the total number of factors including the perfectly observables ones. In the sub-

sequent estimation we consider the following finite order VAR(P) approximation

of the unobserved state dynamics







ftc fty

P
 = bp 
p=1

f

c t-1

f

y t-1

 + Atf .

(2.6)

2.1 Factor Identification
Identification of the model against rotational indeterminacy requires normalization and additional restrictions. We follow the approach of Bernanke, Boivin
6

and Eliasz [2005] and normalize the upper [Kc × Kc] block of  f to the identity matrix and restrict the upper [Kc × Ny] block of y to only contain zeros.1

3 Estimation and Identification of Shocks

3.1 Estimation
We cast the state space model of the previous section into a stacked first order Markov state space representation. Estimation is implemented by a multi-move Gibbs sampler, which involves the Kalman smoother for evaluating the likelihood of the unobserved factors. Given the sequence of sampled factors we draw the parameters via posterior sampling. In particular we employ a Gibbs sampler for the two blocks of parameters, the first referring to the parameters of the observation equation and the second block containing the parameter space of the state equation. The above state space representation can be rewritten as

Xt =  ft + et
ft = P bp ft-p + utf p=1

(3.1) (3.2)

where

  =  f
0 Ny ×Kc

 y  , INy



R =  Re

0 

00

(3.3)

where Xt = (Xtc , fty ) , et = (etc , 0) and ft = ( ftc , fty ) . For the companion form of the model we define Ft = ( ft , ft-1 , ..., ft-p+1 ) , ut = (utf , 0, ..., 0) , b =
1Note that this approach is overidentified. However, it is easy to implement and does not require further sign restrictions on the factor loadings or further normalizations of the covariance matrices of the residuals. Alternative restrictions and normalizations for factor identification are reported e.g. in Geweke and Zhou [1996]. The analysis and comparison of the different approaches to factor identification goes beyond the scope of this paper.

7

(b1, b2, . . . , bP) and

 b1 b2 . . . bp-1 bP



 

IK

0

...

0

0 

B

=

 

0

IK . . .

0

0

 

,



 

...

...

...

...

...

 



0 0 . . . IK 0

 Qu 0 . . . 0



 0 0 ... 0 

Q

=

  

...

...

...

.

.

.

 

.





0 0 ... 0

where the 0's and Q have dimension [K × K] , and [PK × PK] respectively. We define   [ 0 . . . 0]. The final companion form results in

Ft = BFt-1 + ut Xt = Ft + et

(3.4) (3.5)

The parameter space to be estimated is given by  = (y,  f , b, Re, Qu), while the history of the observed data and the latent factors are given by XT = (X1, . . . , XT) and FT = (F1, . . . , FT) respectively. Hence the estimation algorithm can be simplified and summarized by two steps relying on the blocking scheme.
First we initialize the sampler by finding starting values 0 = ( f 0, y0, b0, R0e , Q0u) and (F0). Given a set of initial values (0, F0) we sample the parameters conditional on the data, and afterwards sample the latent factors given the new set of parameters and data.
Step 1: FT(g) = p(FT | XT, (g-1))
Step 2: (g) = p( | XT, FT(g))

We cycle through this procedure sufficiently many times until the target distribution has been empirically approximated. An initial number of draws will be discarded as burn in. To reduce the dependency of the posterior sampler and to reduce the autocorrelation of the chain, a thinning parameter   1 is introduced. Hence only every th draw after the burn in is stored. Details about the implementation and specification are reported in section (4) on the empirical application. Algorithm (1) contains a pseudo code of the employed algorithm for illustrative purposes. A detailed technical derivation and description of the posterior sampling technique is provided in Appendix (A).

8

Algorithm 1 FAVAR estimation via Multi-move Gibbs sampling

Step 0, [Initialization]: Set g ; 0.

p0(F0,  f 0, y0, b0, R0e , Q0u).

Get initial values for states and parameters.

Set g ; 1.

Step 1, [Evaluate likelihood of latent states]: p(FT | XT, , Re, b, Qu)  FFBS
Do forward filtering and backward sampling

Step 2, [Sample parameters from observation equation]: p(n, Re,nn | XT, FT) 2.a : p(Re,nn | n(g-1), XT, FT)  fIG 2.b : p(n | R(e,gn)n, XT, FT)  fN
Sample equation by equation due to conditional Gaussianity.

Step 3, [Sample parameters from state equation]: p(b, Qu | XT, FT) 3.a : p(Qu | FT(g), XT)  fIW 3.b : p(b | Qu(g), FT(g), XT)  fN
Sample parameters from a normal inverted Wishart density.
If g  G set g ; g + 1 and go to Step 1. Otherwise stop.

3.2 Identification of Shocks
One objective of this paper is to analyze the role of monetary policy shocks during the US Great Depression. This involves identifying the non-systematic part of monetary policy. The traditional approach in our model framework would be the Cholesky identification, where the policy instrument is ordered last in the FAVAR equation. Then, the policy instrument reacts contemporaneously to the other variables through the common factors but not vice versa. As shown in Amir Ahmadi and Uhlig [2008] this approach is flawed and produces unreasonable results for post-war US data.2. In this paper we therefore follow the methodology of Amir Ahmadi and Uhlig [2008]. Generalizing results of Uhlig [2005] to the dynamic factor model, this approach identifies policy through restrictions on the sign of the impulse response functions for specified periods.3
Identification of structural shocks through imposing sign restrictions is based on assumptions about the sign of the impulse response functions of key macroeconomic variables. Such restrictions should represent `conventional wisdom' de-
2We also experimented with the traditional Cholesky decomposition, and encountered similar problems on an even larger scale.
3Implementations of sign restrictions in similar models can also be found e.g. in Mo¨ nch [2005] and Rubio-Ramirez, Waggoner and Zha [2007].
9

rived from economic theory that most researchers can agree on.4 Sign restrictions turn out to be particularly well suited to the FAVAR model, as they are straightforward to impose on a large number of series.
The structural FAVAR is obtained by inserting (2.4) into the reduced form version in (3.2):

P

ft =

bp ft-p + Atf

p=1

The

crucial

step

is

to

represent

the

one-step

ahead

prediction

error

f
t

as

a

lin-

ear combination of suitably defined orthogonalized structural shocks (see Uhlig

[2005]. For this, assume the fundamental innovations are mutually independent

and have unit variance,

E[tf

f
t

]

=

IK

The restriction on A then emerges from the covariance structure of the reduced form factor innovation, which leads to:

Qu = E[utf utf ]

E[utf utf ]

=

AE[tf

f
t

]A

AE[tf

f
t

]A

= AA

Following Uhlig [2005] we define an impulse vector as a column of matrix A. Such a vector can be obtained from any decomposition, e.g. the Cholesky decomposition, of the VCV matrix of the factor residual matrix A~ A~ = Qu.
Definition 1 The vector a  K is called an impulse vector, iff there is some matrix
A, so that AA = Qu and so that a is a column of A According to Proposition 1 of Uhlig [2005,pp. 18], any impulse vector can be
characterized as follows. Let A~ A~ = Qu be the Cholesky decomposition. Then a is an impulse vector if and only if there is some K-dimensional vector  of unit length so that

a = A~ 
4The sign restriction approach was introduced to the SVAR literature by Dywer [1997], Faust [1998], Canova and de Nicolo [2002], and Uhlig [2005].

10

Given the impulse vector, let rk(s)  K be the vector response at horizon s to the k-th shock in a Cholesky decomposition of Qu. Then the impulse response ra(s) for a is simply given by
K
ra(s) =  iri(s). i=1
For estimation consider the companion form of the state space in (3.4)-(3.5)
Ft = BFt-1 + ut Xt = Ft + et
To compute the impulse response vector a, let a = [a , 01,K(P-1)] and compute ra,k(s) = (Bsa)k.
to get the impulse response of factor k to an impulse in a at horizon s. Note that ra(s) is the vector of impulse response functions of all factors to an impulse vector a at horizon s. As a second step we have to compute the impulse response functions of the single variables by combining the respective factor loading with ra(s) accordingly. This requires us to compute
rna (s) = nra(s).
where n is the respective n-th row vector of the factor loading matrix. We set the sign restriction on the shape of the individual impulse response functions according to the following assumption, following Uhlig [2005]: Assumption 1 A (contractionary) monetary policy impulse vector is an impulse vector a so that the individual impulse response functions to a of price and nonborrowed reserves are not positive and the impulse responses for the policy instrument such as the short term discount rate (controllable monetary aggregate, e.g. M1) is not negative (positive), for a specified horizon s=0,. . . ,S. Table (1) provides a summary of the identifying sign restrictions we impose.
4 Specification and Model Fit
4.1 Data and Model Specification
All data are taken from the NBER's macroeconomic history database. Most of these data are contemporary and were collected for the business cycle dating
11

Table 1: Sign restrictions imposed for identification

CPI Inflation General Price Index Whole Sale Price Index Metal FRB Production Index Discount Rate Commercial Paper Rate M0

amoney 0 0 0
0 0 0

asupply 0 0
0

ademand 0 0
0

This table summarizes the restrictions imposed for the contemporaneous period and the specified number of periods following the shock. Each column defines an impulse vector to one orthogonal shock. The shocks are: amoney : deflationary monetary policy shock, ademand negative demand shock, asupply positive supply shock.

project of Burns and Mitchell [1947]. Our dataset includes a total of 164 time
series, ranging from industrial production to order flows and housing startups,
agricultural, raw material, and finished goods prices, measures of deposits, sav-
ings, and liquidity in the banking system, as well as interest rates on call money,
commercial paper, and various medium and long term bonds. Table 2 in Ap-
pendix B provides the details along with the NBER macroeconomic database
classification codes. To achieve stationarity, some of the data series were trans-
formed into logarithmic first differences.
We estimate the model using the data in monthly frequency for the US from
1919:02 until 1939:02. This period covers the slide into and recovery from the
recession of 1920-21, as well as the downturn of the Great Depression. In the
following, we report the results from a FAVAR model with Kc = 4 factors and P = 12 lags5 on a dataset including one policy instrument and N = 164 informa-
tional variables.6.
5We tried several versions with different lag length (up to 13), without much change in the results.
6We experimented with including more factors, and found that little information was added by increasing the dimension of the system. This is broadly consistent with the results in Stock and Watson [2005], who report an optimal choice of seven factors for their postwar U.S. data set of 132 series with this methodology.

12

4.2 Model Fit
We performed several checks to see whether the model represents the data in an adequate manner. The first obvious check is to obtain the goodness of fit of the observation equation (2.1) for each series Xc. Results are listed in Table (3) below. As can be seen, the overall fit is high; the factors seem to capture the common components of the interwar business cycle well. Thus, a VAR in these factors or common components should not suffer from omitted variable bias. This implies that adding individual series to the VAR in eq. (2.3) above will not alter the shape of any impulse response functions substantially.7 Upon increasing the number of factors, the model fit did not change much, and the subsequent VAR analysis remained basically unaffected.
4.3 Convergence Diagnostics
To ensure that the results are based on converged simulation chains that represent the respective target distribution and not only e.g. some local mode, we applied a battery of further convergence diagnostics to the simulated parameters. The respective diagnostics are not a guarantee for convergence but can reduce the uncertainty. The diagnostics we employed are widespread in the MCMC literature, and are reported in Appendix D. We also checked the precision of the sampler by plotting the associated error bands. An example for the extracted factors covering the 95 % probability band is given in Figure (1).
5 The Surprise Component of Monetary Policy
We follow standard procedure in VAR analysis and obtain impulse responses to identified monetary policy shocks, employing the FAVAR model as a representation of the monetary transmission mechanism. As mentioned above, our attempts to obtain economically meaningful impulse responses from a Cholesky decomposition of the FAVAR model failed. 8 Hence we resort to Uhlig's [2005] sign restriction strategy. We implement this by imposing, among others, a sign
7If this property holds strictly, the factor model is termed exact. If including individual series adds to the information content significantly but with small coefficients, the factor model is approximate. See Stock and Watson [2005] for a survey of the implications and for testing strategies.
8Results are available upon request.
13

restriction on the response of the CPI to a contractionary monetary shock9. There has been some uncertainty as to which monetary policy instrument
was actually used at the time. The discussions in Friedman and Schwartz [1963] suggest a role for targeting monetary aggregates, but also leave a role for interest rates. We therefore present results for five model specifications, each corresponding to a different candidate policy instrument. These include two interest rates ­ the Federal Discount Rate and the rate on prime commercial paper ­ and three monetary aggregates ­ high powered money M0 as well as M1 and M2.
In spite of the restrictions we impose, the results are not encouraging. The responses of the FRB index of manufacturing to a contractionary interest rate shock in the Discount Rate model follow a rotated S-shaped pattern, being nearsignificantly negative both at the one year and after the three year lag, and weakly positive in between (see Figure 4 below). The contribution of a contractionary discount rate policy shock to the forecast error variance of industrial production remains below 10% over four years (see Table 4 for a tabulation of all variance decompositions reported here). Choosing the Commercial Paper Rate as the relevant policy instrument instead, the impulse response function remains in negative territory throughout (see Figure 5). However, the values are insignificant, and the contribution of the policy shock to the forecast error variance of FRB manufacturing remains solidly below 10%. This is pretty much what Uhlig [2005] found for U.S. postwar data.
Model specifications with monetary aggregates as the policy instrument fare slightly better. Responses to a shock in high-powered money M0 as the policy instrument are again S-shaped, veering from negative into positive and back into negative (Figure 6). The same S-shaped pattern is obtained for responses to shocks in M2, except that the response in the second year goes to zero instead of into positive (Figure 8). Responses to shocks in M1 look well behaved for the first year but then rapidly lose force (Figure 7). The variance decompositions show that responses to M0 and M1 shocks contributed between 15 and 20% to the forecast error variance of FRB manufacturing output. For M2 as the policy instrument, the explained variance of FRB manufacturing remains well below 10%, averaging between 6 and 7% over the four-year horizon that we look at.
9A detailed list of sign restrictions imposed for identification can be found in Table (1)
14

This seems close to the values reported by BBE [2005] for postwar industrial output.10
Drawing the results of this section together, we find that the responses of the real economy to contractionary monetary shocks are in generally weak and, pathologically, change their signs. This result obtains under four of five different specifications of the monetary policy instrument and two different identification schemes for the innovations in the VAR. Still the best results we obtain for responses to shocks in M1, which do not exhibit sign changes and which explain around 20% of the forecast error variance of manufacturing output. This is in line with postwar data. A FAVAR model drawing on rich data from the interwar period does not find evidence for unusual, pervasive negative effects of contractionary monetary policy during the Great Depression.
6 The Systematic Component of Monetary Policy
6.1 The Policy Reaction Function
Our analysis so far has been agnostic about the choice of monetary policy instruments, and has worked with several candidate policy instruments instead. This section attempts to identify the reaction function of monetary policy during the Great Depression. To this end, we obtain the responses of the respective candidate monetary policy instrument to aggregate demand and supply shocks, using the same techniques as before. In this way, we can directly measure if and how the monetary authority reacted to change in output and prices.
6.2 Aggregate Supply Shocks
6.2.1 Full Sample Analysis
As laid out before, we again employ a sign restrictions approach to identify supply and demand shocks. We identify a positive aggregate supply shock by restricting the response of CPI inflation to be negative and the response of the FRB index of manufacturing to be positive for a horizon of 6 months. Results indicate only weak systematic responses. For the observation period as a whole, the instruments in the Commercial Paper Rate model (Figure 9) and the Federal
10A full set of impulse response functions for all series of the dataset is available from the authors upon request.
15

Discount Rate model (Figure 10) exhibit moves in the wrong direction, with no visible effect on high powered money M0 or on M1. In the Federal Discount Rate model, M2 would even increase significantly, indicating monetary accommodation of the positive supply shock.
The monetary targeting models fare somewhat better: with M0 or M1 as the monetary instrument (in Figures 11 and 12, respectively) there is a clear-cut negative response of M2 to the positive supply shock. However, there is no clear response of the respective candidate monetary instruments themselves, casting doubt on the underlying money multiplier mechanism. Assuming instead that M2 itself is the monetary instrument (in Figure 13), we do obtain strong interest rate responses, however the response of M2 itself veers into positive after just a few months.
On the basis of these results, it would seem safe to exclude inflation targeting through interest rates from the list of possible policy functions of the Federal Reserve. The better performance of the monetary specifications provides some support for the Friedman and Schwartz [1963] monetary targeting view. However, the connection between M0 or M1 and the monetary M2 target seems less than clear-cut, and the responses of M2 are plagued by sign problems. Looking at the observation period as a whole, the evidence for systematic responses of monetary policy seems rather mixed.
6.2.2 Subsample Analysis
Turning to the analysis of subsample periods we find that a somewhat different picture emerges. The subsamples are five critical junctures during the observation period. The first includes the information in the FAVAR as of September 1929, the last month before the New York stock market crash. The second includes all data until November 1930, the last month before the first wave of banking panics. The third extends to June 1931, just before the German debt and reparations moratorium, which triggered Britain's departure from the gold Standard. The fourth extends to August 1931, the last month before Britain indeed broke away from the Gold Standard. The last is based on information up until February 1933, the month before Roosevelt's bank closure and the formal inception of the New Deal. For the Federal Discount Rate model, we find an
16

increase in short term interest rates in response to a positive supply shock for up to 2 years. Turning to the three monetary aggregate models, there is now a clear-cut response of the short term interest rates for all subperiods except for the first one.
The results from the subsample analysis suggests that systematic monetary policy did respond increasingly to supply shocks. The responses of the policy instruments were feeble until 1929 but became more pronounced as time progressed and the slump deepened. Still, the responses we observe are not free of sign problems, indicating that the identifying restrictions may still not be strong enough. Results for all subperiods are provided in Appendix E, available upon request from the authors.
6.3 Aggregate Demand Shocks
6.3.1 Full Sample Analysis
As outlined above, we identify a negative demand shock through imposing a negative response of both FRB manufacturing output and CPI inflation for 6 months. For the full observation period, the response of the policy instruments to a negative aggregate demand shock is insignificant. Assuming an interest rate to be the policy instrument, short term interest rates slightly decrease following a negative demand shock. However, this holds only with a high degree of uncertainty. The specifications with monetary aggregates as instruments perform poorly, indicating no monetary response at all or even a slight degree of accommodation, as in the case of the M1 model. Results are reported in Appendix D in Figures 14 through 18.
6.3.2 Subsample Analysis
Turning to the subsample analysis, we find that the response of interest rates to an adverse demand shock became more pronounced over time. This result holds for all five models considered. Again, there are sign problems in the responses of the monetary aggregates. Results for the subsample periods, provided in Appendix E, can be requested from the authors.
17

7 Any Effects of Systematic Monetary Policy?

This section ventures into monetary policy effects that might go beyond mere on-off surprises. Under rational expectations and a minimal set of frictions, as is standard in the surprise Phillips curve paradigm since Lucas [1972], systematic monetary policy along a reaction function should be neutral and have no real effects. Any monetary policy effects beyond one-time surprises would entail deviations from rational expectations, or possibly a tighter set of constraints on the pricing mechanism. Such deviations, e.g. Friedman's [1968] backwardlooking adaptive expectations approach, appear to come closest in spirit to the original Friedman and Schwartz [1963] hypothesis.
In a reduced form model like the FAVAR we specified, estimates of the model parameters  = (y,  f , b, Re, Qu) are obtained conditional on the prevailing monetary policy regime { f m}0t , where m is the monetary policy instrument. This would render policy evaluation through counterfactual variations of the policy sequence meaningless, Lucas [1976]. The only permissible statement is therefore about the information content of the observed policy sequence, conditional on the agents' information set at time t. Under rational expectations, only the innovations to policy matter. Hence, historical realizations of the monetary policy instrument should not influence agents' expectations about the state of the economy fty+s, i.e.

E( fty+s|It, f m0t ) = E( fty+s|It)

(7.1)

In principle, both sides of this equation can be evaluated separately, and their empirical forecasting power be compared. This is the estimation strategy adopted in this section. By standard arguments about reverse causality, higher forecasting precision of the LHS of this equation (i.e, when monetary policy history { f m}0t is included) is not sufficient for the presence of systematic policy effects. Rational expectations imply, however, that it is a necessary condition: if upon including past realizations of the monetary policy instrument, no improvement in forecasting power is found, it seems safe to rule out systematic policy effects, as predicted by the rational expectations approach.
In what follows we present forecasts of a few key series conditional on infor-

18

mation at time t for five critical junctures during the Great Depression. The first includes the information set as of September 1929, the last month before the New York stock market crash. The second includes the data until November 1930, the last month before the first wave of banking panics. The third extends to June 1931, just before the Austrian/German financial crisis. The fourth extends to August 1931, the last month before Britain broke away from the Gold Standard. The last forecast is based on information up until February 1933, the month before Roosevelt's bank closure and the formal inception of the New Deal. For each of these observation subperiods, we obtain a baseline conditional forecast from the FAVAR model excluding all of the candidate monetary policy instruments. For the same subperiods, we also obtain five more conditional forecasts from the FAVAR, each including one of the five candidate monetary policy instruments. The forecast error variance from these predictions can then be compared to the baseline.
Figure 19 shows the results from the baseline forecasts. As can be seen from the forecasts of both FRB manufacturing output and orders of machinery (a leading indicator of equipment investment), neither the onset of the recession nor its further deepening are very well captured by this non-monetary baseline. The baseline from late 1929 does predict a major deflationary episode, but the forecasts taken at later times all wrongly predict an inflationary correction. These non-monetary FAVARs appear to bear out conventional wisdom about the early phase of the slump, as laid out in Friedman and Schwartz [1963] and Bernanke [1983], or in Temin [1989]: the sharp downturn after 1929 was itself not predictable. They also broadly confirm work of Dominguez, Fair, and Shapiro [1988] who found the depression difficult to predict from non-monetary VARs.
Figures 20 and 21 provide forecasts including the commercial paper rate and the discount rate as policy instruments, respectively. The first group of forecasts underpredicts output at very short intervals, generating scenarios of sharp downward spikes and swift recoveries. The forecasts from the discount rate model, in contrast, overpredict output at short intervals. Both group of forecasts broadly agree on predicting inflation.
Figures 22 and 23 suggest that FAVARs including M0 or M1 are somewhat better at predicting output at short intervals than the interest rate models; they also
19

appear to perform better than the non-monetary baseline. This does not hold true for the M2 model, which does not perform better than the non-monetary baseline. Again, all forecasts agree on predicting imminent inflation at most of the critical junctures of the Great Depression. A central bank employing any of these forecasts would not have regarded its stance during the Great Depression as deflationary.
Examination of the root mean square forecast errors in Tables 5 to 8 confirms this impression. At all horizons, forecasts of output from the M0 and M1 model outperform the non-monetary baseline. This does not hold for the interest rate specifications as well as the M2 model. Unsurprisingly, inclusion of any of the five candidate policy instruments in the FAVAR outperforms the baseline in predicting CPI inflation. Still, it is remarkable that none of the FAVARs predict the protracted deflationary process witnessed in the Great Depression.
This evidence is again consistent with conventional wisdom, see in particular Hamilton [1987, 1992]. There appears to be no evidence of learning or updating about the deflationary process; the priors in the forecast of CPI appear impossible to overturn. Taking this further, if the FAVAR aggregates the information available to monetary decision makers at the time, their lack of worries about easing monetary policy becomes apparent: given the strongly inflationary signals that monetary policy appeared to be emitting, no further action seemed necessary or even useful. Monetary policy in the conventional sense had lost traction in 1929, and apparently die not regain it before well into the 1930s.
Drawing the evidence from this section together, there is some evidence that past realizations of monetary policy help to improve output forecasts during the depression. This is particularly true for M0 and M1 as candidate policy instruments, which beat the non-monetary baseline forecasts. Systematic monetary policy was perhaps more informative about the state of the U.S. economy during the depression than would be compatible with rational expectations. However, even the forecasts including past realizations of monetary policy are far from satisfactory: monetary policy regimes do not appear to explain the Great Depression.
20

8 Conclusion
Recent research has attempted to increase the explanatory power of vector autoregressions for monetary policy analysis by drawing on the common components in a large panel of time series. In this paper, we employed the factor augmented vector autoregression (FAVAR) methodology of Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz [2005] to reassess the effects of monetary policy on the U.S. economy during the interwar Great Depression.
We used a panel of 164 time series, taken from the macroeconomic history database of the NBER, to provide information on the common component of the U.S. business cycle during the interwar period. We specified FAVARs based on this information set for five different specifications of the monetary policy instrument.
To avoid pervasive price puzzles, we were forced to employ a sign restrictions approach. In spite of the identifying assumptions we make, we find that while monetary policy was clearly not neutral, its effects on the real economy were mixed and changed signs. Also, we find the overall contribution of monetary policy to the variance explanation of real variables to be as low as in the postwar period, if not lower.
We obtained the responses of the various candidate policy instruments to identified demand and supply shocks in order to identify the reaction function of monetary policy. In general we found these responses to be weak; however there is evidence of an increased responsiveness to both real and nominal shocks as the depression deepened. We also tested for deviations from the rational expectations paradigm in order to see if systematic policy effects were present. While there is some evidence of such effects, they are again far from clear-cut and pervasive.
At the present stage, we conclude that while monetary policy certainly played some role in the interwar depression, there is only scant support for the traditional hypothesis that the Great Depression was mostly a monetary phenomenon.
21

References
[1] Amir Ahmadi, Pooyan and Harald Uhlig [2008], "Measuring the Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy: A Bayesian Factor Augmented Vector Autoregression (BFAVAR) Approach with Agnostic Identification," mimeo.
[2] Bernanke, Ben [1983], Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the Great Depression," American Economic Review 73, 257-76.
[3] Bernanke, Ben [1995], "The Macroeconomics of the Great Depression: A Comparative Approach," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 27, 1-28.
[4] Bernanke, Ben and Jean Boivin [2003], "Monetary Policy in a Data-Rich Environment," Journal of Monetary Economics 50, 525-546.
[5] Bernanke, Ben, Jean Boivin and Piotr Eliasz [2005], "Measuring the Effects of Monetary Policy: A Factor-Augmented Vector Autoregressive (FAVAR) Approach," Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 387-422.
[6] Bernanke, Ben, and Kevin Carey [1996], "Nominal Wage Stickiness and Aggregate Supply in the Great Depression," Quarterly Journal of Economics 111, 853-883.
[7] Bordo, Michael, Christopher Erceg and Charles Evans [2000], "Money, Sticky Wages, and the Great Depression," American Economic Review 90, 1447-1463.
[8] Carter, Christopher and Robert Kohn [1994], "On Gibbs Sampling for State Space Models," Biometrika 81, 541-553.
[9] Chari, Varadarajan, Patrick Kehoe and Ellen McGrattan [2007], "Business Cycle Accounting," Econometrica 75, 781-836.
[10] Christiano, Lawrence, Roberto Motto and Massimo Rostagno [2003], "The Great Depression and the Friedman-Schwartz Hypothesis," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 35, 1119-1197.
[11] Cole, Harold and Lee Ohanian [2004], "New Deal Policies and the Persistence of the Great Depression: A General Equilibrium Analysis"', Journal of Political Economy 112, 779-816.
22

[12] Cole, Harold, Lee Ohanian and Ron Leung [2005], "Deflation and the International Great Depression: A Productivity Puzzle," NBER Working Papers 11237, National Bureau of Economic Research.
[13] Dominguez, Kathryn, Ray Fair and Matthew Shapiro [1988], "Forecasting the Depression: Harvard versus Yale," American Economic Review (78), 595-612.
[14] Ebell, Monique and Albrecht Ritschl [2007], "Real Origins of the Great Depression: Monopolistic Competition, Union Power, and the American Business Cycle in the 1920s,", CEPR Discussion Paper 6146, Centre for Economic Policy Research.
[15] Friedman, Milton, and Anna Schwartz [1963], A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960 (Princeton: Princeton University Press).
[16] Friedman, Milton [1968], "The Role of Monetary Policy," American Economic Review 58, 1-17.
[17] Geman, Stuart and Donald Geman [1984], "Stochastic Relaxation, Gibbs Distribution and the Bayesian Restoration of Images," IEEE Transactions of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 6, 721-41.
[18] Geweke, John [1977], "The Dynamic Factor Analysis of Economic Time Series," in: Dennis Aigner and Arthur Goldberger (eds.) Latent Variables in SocioEconomic Models (Amsterdam: North-Holland).
[19] Hamilton, James [1987], "Monetary Factors in the Great Depression," Journal of Monetary Economics 19, 145-169.
[20] Hamilton, James [1992], "Was the Deflation during the Great Depression Anticipated? Evidence from the Commodity Futures Market," American Economic Review 82, 157-177.
[21] Harrison, Sharon and Mark Weder [2006], "Did Sunspot Forces Cause the Great Depression?," Journal of Monetary Economics, 53, 1327-1339.
[22] Kadiyala, Rao and Sune Karlsson [1997], "Numerical Methods for Estimation and Inference Bayesian VAR-Models," Journal of Applied Econometrics 12, 99132.
23

[23] Leeper, Eric, Christopher Sims, and Tao Zha [1996], "What Does Monetary Policy Do?," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 1-63.
[24] Lucas, Robert [1972], "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money," Journal of Economic Theory 4, 103-124.
[25] Lucas, Robert [1976], "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique," in: Karl Brunner and Allan Meltzer (eds.), The Phillips Curve and Labor Markets, Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public Policy 1 (Amsterdam: North Holland).
[26] Mo¨ nch, Emanuel [2005], "Term Structure Surprises: The Predictive Content of Curvature, Level, and Slope," mimeo.
[27] Ritschl, Albrecht, and Ulrich Woitek [2000], "Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great Depression? A Bayesian VAR Analysis for the U.S. Economy," CEPR Discussion Paper 2547, Centre for Economic Policy Research.
[28] Sargent, Thomas and Cristopher Sims, [1977], "Business Cycle Modeling without Pretending to Have Too Much A Priori Economic Theory" in: Cristopher Sims (ed.) New Methods in Business Research (Minneapolis: Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis).
[29] Schwartz, Anna [1981], "Understanding 1929-1933," in: Karl Brunner (ed.) The Great Depression Revisited (Amsterdam: Kluwer).
[30] Sims, Christopher [1980], "Macroeconomics and Reality," Econometrica 48, 148.
[31] Sims, Christopher [1999], "The Role of Interest Rate Policy in the Generation and Propagation of Business Cycles: What Has Changed Since the 30s?" in: Jeffrey Fuhrer and Scott Shuh (eds.) Beyond Shocks: What Causes Business Cycles? (Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston).
[32] Stock, James and Mark Watson [2005], "Implications of Dynamic Factor Models for VAR Analysis," NBER Working Paper 11467, National Bureau of Economic Research.
[33] Temin, Peter [1989], Lessons from the Great Depression (Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press).
24

[34] Uhlig, Harald [2005], "What Are the Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy? Results from an Agnostic Identification Procedure," Journal of Monetary Economics 52, 381-419.
25

Appendix

A Bayesian Inference based on MCMC

A.1 Inference

Bayesian analysis treats the parameters of the model as random variables. We are interested in inference on the parameter space  =  f , y, R, vec(),  and the factors {Ft}tT=1. Multi move Gibbs Sampling alternately samples the parameters  and the factors Ft, given the data. We use the multi move version of the Gibbs sampler because this approach allows us as, a first step, to estimate the unobserved common components, namely the factors via the Kalman filtering technique conditional on the given hyperparameters, and as a second step calculate the hyperparameters of the model given the factors via the Gibbs sampler in the respective blocking.
Let XT = (X1, . . . , XT) and FT = (F1, . . . , FT) define the histories of X and F, respectively. The task is to derive the posterior densities which require to empirically approximate the marginal posterior densities of F and :

p(FT) = p() =

p(FT, )d p(FT, )dFT

where

p(FT, )

is the joint posterior density and the integrals are taken with respect to the supports of  and FT respectively. The procedure applied to obtain the empirical approximation of the posterior distribution is the previously mentioned multi move version of the Gibbs sampling technique by Carter and Kohn [1994] which is also applied by BBE11.

A.2 Choosing the Starting Values 0
In general one can start the iteration cycle with any arbitrary randomly drawn set of parameters, as the joint and marginal empirical distributions of the generated parameters will converge at an exponential rate to its joint and marginal
11For more details see Kim and Nelson [1999], Eliasz [2005] and BBE [2005]

26

target distributions as S  . This has been shown by Geman and Geman [1984]. We will try several starting values in order to assure that our model has converged and does not depend on the choice of initial values. We follow the advice of Eliasz [2005] that one should judiciously select the starting values in the framework of large dimensional models. In case of large cross-sections, highly dimensional likelihoods make irregularities more likely. This can reduce the number of draws relevant for convergence and hence saves time, which in a computer-intensive statistical framework is of great relevance. We apply the first step estimates of principal component analysis to select the starting values. Since Gelman and Rubin [1992] have shown that a single chain of the Gibbs sampler might give a "false sense of security ", it has become common practice to try out different starting values, at best from a randomly (over)dispersed set of parameters, and then check the convergence verifying that they lead to similar empirical distributions.

A.3 Conditional density of the factors {Ft}tT=1 given XT and 
In this subsection we want to draw from

p(FT | XT, )

assuming that the hyperparameters of the parameter space  are given, hence we describe Bayesian inference on the dynamic evolution of the factors Ft conditional on Xt for t = 1, . . . , T and conditional on . The transformations that are required to draw the factors have been done in the previous section. The conditional distribution, from which the state vector is generated, can be expressed as the product of conditional distributions by exploiting the Markov property of state space models in the following way
T-1
p(FT | XT, ) = p(FT | XT, )  pF(Ft | Ft+1, XT, ) t=1
The state space model is linear and Gaussian, hence we have:

FT | XT,   N(FT|T, PT|T) Ft | Ft+1XT,   N(Ft|t,Ft+1 , Pt|t,Ft+1 )

(A.1) (A.2)

27

with

FT|T = E(FT | XT, ) PT|T = Cov(FT | XT, ) Ft|t,Ft+1 = E(Ft | XT, Ft+1, ) = E(Ft | Ft+1, Ft|t, ) Pt|t,Ft+1 = Cov(Ft | XT, Ft+1, ) = Cov(Ft | Ft+1, Ft|t, )

(A.3) (A.4) (A.5) (A.6)

where (A.1) holds for the Kalman filter for t = 1, . . . , T and (A.2) holds for the Kalman smoother for t = T - 1, T - 2, . . . , 1. Here Ft|t refers to the expectation of Ft conditional on information dated t or earlier. We can, then, obtain Ft|t and Pt|t for t = 1, . . . , T by the Kalman Filter, conditional on  and the data XT, by applying the formulas in Hamilton (1994), for example. From the last iteration, we obtain FT|T and PT|T and using those, we can draw Ft. We can go backwards through the sample, deriving FT-1|T-1,Ft and PT-1|T-1,Ft by Kalman Filter, drawing FT-1 from (14), and so on for Ft, t = T - 2, T - 3, . . . , 1. A modification of the Kalman filter procedure, as described in Kim and Nelson
(1999), is necessary when the number of lags p in the FAVAR equation is greater
than 1.

A.4 B.1.3 Conditional density of the parameters  given XT and {Ft}tT=1
Drawing from the conditional distribution of the parameters p( | XT, FT) can be blocked into to parts, namely the one referring to the observation equation and the second part referring to the state equation.

A.4.1 Conditional density of  and R
This part refers to observation equation of the state space model which, conditional on the estimated factors and the data, specifies the distribution of  and R. Here we can apply equation by equation OLS in order to obtain ^ and Z^ . This is feasible due to the fact that the errors are uncorrelated. According to the specification by BBE we also assume a proper (conjugate) but diffuse inverse Gamma prior for each n2:
Ripirior  I G(3, 0.001)

28

Note that R is assumed to be diagonal. The posterior then has the following form
Ripiosterior | XT, FT  I G(R¯ ii, T + 0.001) where R¯ ii = 3 + Z^ i Z^ i + ^ i[M0-1 + (FT(i) FT(i))-1]-1^ i and M0-1 denoting the variance parameter in the prior on the coefficients of the i-th equation of i. The normalization discussed in section (4) in order to identify the factors and the loadings separately requires to set M0 = I. Conditional on the drawn value of Rii the prior on the factor loadings of the i-th equation is:
iprior  N (0, Rii M0-1). The regressors of the i-th equation are represented by F~ (Ti). The values of i are drawn from the posterior
iposterior  N (¯ i, Rii M¯ i-1) where ¯ i = M¯ i-1(FT(i) FTi )^ i and M¯ i-1(FT(i) FTi ).
A.4.2 B.1.3.2 Conditional density of vec() and 
The next Gibbs block requires to draw vec() and  conditional on the most current draws of the factors, the Riis and is and the data. As the FAVAR equation has a standard VAR form one can likewise estimate vec(^ ) and ^ via equation by equation OLS. We impose a diffuse conjugate Normal-Wishart prior:
vec()prior |   N (0,   0) prior  I W (,0, K + M + 2)
which results in the following posterior:
vec()posterior  N (vec(¯ ),   ¯ ) posterior  I W (¯, T + K + M + 2)
In the spirit of the Minnesota prior, it is desirable to have a prior which assigns less impact to more distant lags. Hence, the BBE [2005] specification follows Kadiyala and Karlsson [1997]. First we draw  from the posterior, where ¯ = ,0 + V^ V^ + ^ [0 + (FT-1FT-1)-1]-1^ and where V^ is the matrix of OLS
29

residuals. Then, conditional on the draw  we draw from the posterior of the coefficients where ¯ = ¯ (FT-1FT-1)^ and ¯ = (0-1 + (FT-1FT-1))-1. To ensure stationarity, we truncate the draws and only accept values for  less than one in absolute values . This block on Kalman filter and smoother and the block on drawing the parameter space are iterated until convergence is achieved. For the implementation of the DCNW prior it required to set the diagonal elements of ,0 to the corresponding d-lag univariate autoregressions, i2. We construct the diagonal elements of 0 such that the prior variances of the parameter of the k lagged j'th variable in the i'th equation equals i2/kj2.12
12For a detailed discussion of the implementation of the prior see the NBER working paper version of BBE (2004) and Kadiyala and Karlsson (1997).
30

B Data

All data are taken from the NBER's macroeconomic history database. Most of these data are contemporary and were collected for the business cycle dating project of Burns and Mitchell (1947). Our dataset includes a total of 164 time series.

NBER Description Pos. Code

TC SA

1 1130 PIG IRON PRODUCTION

5

2 4051 INDEX OF THE GENERAL PRICE LEVEL

5

3 13012 FEDERAL RESERVE BANK DISCOUNT RATES, SAN FRANCISCO

1

4 14125 CURRENCY HELD BY THE PUBLIC

5

5 1054 INDEX OF PRODUCTION OF MANUFACTURES, SEASONALLY ADJUSTED

5

6 1055 INDEX OF PRODUCTION OF PRODUCERS GOODS

5

7 1056 INDEX OF PRODUCTION OF CONSUMERS GOOD

5

8 1057 INDEX OF PRODUCTION OF CONSUMERS GOODS, EXCLUDING AUTOMO- 5 BILES

9 01057A INDEX OF PRODUCTION OF DURABLE GOODS

5

10 01057B INDEX OF PRODUCTION OF TRANSIENT GOODS

5

11 1058

WHEAT FLOUR PRODUCTION

5

12 1060

CORN GRINDINGS

5

13 1064

TOTAL MEAT CONSUMPTION

5

14 1071

BUTTER CONSUMPTION

5

15 1105

PAPER PRODUCTION, ALL GRADES

5

16 01125A CRUDE PETROLEUM CONSUMPTION, RUNS TO STILLS

5

17 1126

GASOLINE PRODUCTION AT REFINERIES

5

18 1131

MERCHANT PIG IRON PRODUCTION

5

19 1135

STEEL INGOT PRODUCTION

5

20 1144

AUTOMOBILE PRODUCTION, TRUCKS

5

21 1148

RAILROAD LOCOMOTIVE SHIPMENTS, DOMESTIC, BY CAR BUILDERS

5

22 1149

FREIGHT CAR SHIPMENTS, DOMESTIC

5

23 1171

WOODWORKING MACHINERY SHIPMENTS, VALUE

5

24 1175

INDEX OF PRODUCTION OF MANUFACTURES, TOTAL

5

25 01191B INDEX OF COMMERCIAL PRODUCTION OF FOODSTUFFS AND TOBACCO

5

26 1204

INDEX OF PRODUCTION OF FUELS

5

27 1234

INDEX OF PRODUCTION OF DURABLE MANUFACTURES

5

28 1260

INDEX OF PRODUCTION OF MANUFACTURED FOOD PRODUCTS

5

29 3009

FREIGHT CAR SURPLUS

5

30 03016A OPERATING REVENUES OF RAILROADS, PASSENGER

5

31 03016B OPERATING REVENUES OF RAILROADS, FREIGHT

5

32 4001

WHOLESALE PRICE OF WHEAT, CHICAGO, SIX MARKETS

5

33 4005

WHOLESALE PRICE OF CORN, CHICAGO

5

34 4006

WHOLESALE PRICE OF COTTON, NEW YORK; 10 MARKETS

5

35 4007

WHOLESALE PRICE OF CATTLE, CHICAGO

5

36 4008

WHOLESALE PRICE OF HOGS, CHICAGO

5

37 4015

WHOLESALE PRICE OF COPPER, ELECTROLYTE, NEW YORK

5

38 4017

WHOLESALE PRICE OF PIG LEAD, NEW YORK

5

39 4030

WHOLESALE PRICE OF GRANULATED SUGAR

5

40 4034

WHOLESALE PRICE OF COFFEE

5

41 4048

INDEX OF WHOLESALE PRICES, BUREAU OF LABOR STATISTICS

5

42 4052

CONSUMER PRICE INDEX, ALL ITEMS LESS FOOD

5

43 4058

INDEX OF WHOLESALE PRICES OF FARM PRODUCTS

5

44 4061

INDEX OF WHOLESALE PRICES OF FOODS

5

45 4064

INDEX OF WHOLESALE PRICE OF TEXTILES

5

46 4066

WHOLESALE PRICES OF METAL AND METAL PRODUCTS

5

47 4068

INDEX OF WHOLESALE PRICES OF BUILDING MATERIALS

5

48 4071

INDEX OF RETAIL PRICES OF FOOD AT HOME

5

49 4074

WHOLESALE PRICE OF OATS, CHICAGO

5

50 4072

COST OF LIVING INDEX

5

51 4079

WHOLESALE PRICE OF CRUDE PETROLEUM, AT WELLS

5

52 4092

WHOLESALE PRICE OF SLAB ZINC

5

53 4099

WHOLESALE PRICE OF COMMON BRICKS, DOMESTIC, NEW YORK

5

54 4128

CONSUMER PRICE INDEX, ALL ITEMS

5

0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1
1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

31

Pos. NBER Code
55 4129 56 4134 57 4181 58 4189 59 4202 60 06002A 61 06002B 62 6008 63 6009 64 6029 65 6058 66 6059 67 7001 68 7002 69 7004 70 7005 71 7012 72 7013 73 7014 74 7015 75 7016 76 7023 77 7028 78 8010B 79 8014 80 8015 81 8016 82 8017 83 8018 84 8046 85 8061 86 8069
87 8071 88 8072 89 8073 90 8074 91 8075 92 8076 93 8078 94 8088 95 8101 96 8104 97 8106 98 8110 99 8112 100 8114 101 8145 102 8261 103 11001 104 11005 105 11009 106 11025
107 12002A 108 12003 109 12004 110 12007 111 12009A 112 12009 113 12013 114 13001 115 13002

Description
WHOLESALE PRICE OF TEA WHOLESALE PRICE OF STRUCTURAL STEEL WHOLESALE PRICE OF STEEL RAILS INDEX OF WHOLESALE PRICES OF INDUSTRIAL COMMODITIES, BABSON INDEX OF WHOLESALE PRICES OF 15 SENSITIVE INDUSTRIAL RAW INDEX OF DEPARTMENT STORE SALES THE PHYSICAL VOLUME OF DEPARTMENT STORE SALES SALES BY GROCERY CHAIN STORES VARIETY CHAIN STORE SALES, ADJUSTED FOR TREND, PRICE INDEX OF ORDERS FOR MACHINE TOOLS AND FORGING MACHINERY INDEX OF TOTAL ADVERTISING INDEX OF WHOLESALE SALES OF SHOES DOMESTIC EXPORTS OF CRUDE FOODSTUFFS DOMESTIC EXPORTS OF MANUFACTURED FOODSTUFFS DOMESTIC EXPORTS OF SEMI-MANUFACTURES DOMESTIC EXPORTS OF FINISHED MANUFACTURES IMPORTS FOR CONSUMPTION OF CRUDE FOOD STUFFS IMPORTS OF MANUFACTURED FOODSTUFFS IMPORTS FOR CONSUMPTION OF CRUDE MATERIALS IMPORTS FOR CONSUMPTION OF SEMI-MANUFACTURES IMPORTS FOR CONSUMPTION OF FINISHED MANUFACTURES TOTAL EXPORTS TOTAL IMPORTS PRODUCTION WORKER EMPLOYMENT, MANUFACTURING, TOTAL INDEX OF FACTORY EMPLOYMENT, PAPER AND PRINTING INDEX OF FACTORY EMPLOYMENT, IRON AND STEEL PRODUCTS INDEX OF FACTORY EMPLOYMENT, STONE, CLAY AND GLASS PRODUCTS INDEX OF FACTORY EMPLOYMENT, LUMBER AND PRODUCTS INDEX OF FACTORY EMPLOYMENT, MACHINERY AVERAGE WEEKLY EARNINGS, REPRESENTATIVE FACTORIES INDEX OF COMPOSITE WAGES INDEX OF AGGREGATE WEEKLY PAYROLLS, PRODUCTION WORKERS TOTAL MANUFACTURING INDEX OF FACTORY PAYROLLS, TEXTILES INDEX OF FACTORY PAYROLLS, PAPER AND PRINTING INDEX OF FACTORY PAYROLLS, IRON AND STEEL PRODUCTS INDEX OF FACTORY PAYROLLS, STONE CLAY AND GLASS INDEX OF FACTORY PAYROLLS - LUMBER AND PRODUCTS INDEX OF FACTORY PAYROLLS, MACHINERY INDEX OF FACTORY PAYROLLS, NEW YORK STATE FACTORIES INDEX OF FACTORY EMPLOYMENT-BAKING INDEX OF FACTORY EMPLOYMENT, LEATHER AND MANUFACTURES INDEX OF FACTORY EMPLOYMENT, PAPER AND PULP INDEX OF EMPLOYMENT, HARDWARE INDEX OF FACTORY PAYROLLS, CANE SUGAR REFINING INDEX OF FACTORY PAYROLLS, BAKING INDEX OF FACTORY PAYROLLS, TOBACCO MANUFACTURES INDEX OF FACTORY PAYROLLS, AUTOMOBILES AVERAGE WEEKLY EARNINGS, MANUFACTURING, TOTAL BOND SALES, PAR VALUE AMERICAN RAILROAD STOCK PRICES INDUSTRIAL STOCK PRICE INDEX, DOW-JONES INDEX OF ALL COMMON STOCK PRICES, COWLES COMMISSION AND S& P CORPORATION INDEX OF INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY INDEX OF AMERICAN BUSINESS ACTIVITY INDEX OF INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION AND TRADE INDEX OF AMERICAN BUSINESS ACTIVITY INDEX OF BUSINESS ACTIVITY, PITTSBURGH INDEX OF AGRICULTURAL MARKETINGS BANK CLEARINGS, DAILY AVERAGE CALL MONEY RATES, MIXED COLLATERAL COMMERCIAL PAPER RATES, NEW YORK CITY

TC
5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5
5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5
5 5 5 5 5 5 5 1 5

SA
0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 1 0 1 1 0 0 0

32

Pos. NBER Description Code

TC SA

116 13003 117 13004 118 13005 119 13006 120 13007 121 13008
122 13009 123 13010 124 13011 125 13021 126 13023 127 13024 128 13025 129 13026 130 13030 131 13031 132 13032
133 13033 134 13035 135 13036 136 13048
137 14062 138 14063 139 14064 140 14065 141 14066 142 14067 143 14069 144 14070 145 14072
146 14076 147 14078
148 14079 149 14080 150 14086
151 14121 152 14126 153 14127
154 14135
155 14137 156 14144 157 14145 158 14172 159 14173
160 14174
161 14175
162 14178
163 14190
164 14195

NINETY DAY TIME-MONEY RATES ON STOCK EXCHANGE LOANS RATES ON CUSTOMER LOANS, NEW YORK CITY RATES ON CUSTOMERS LOANS, NORTHERN AND WESTERN CITIES BANK RATES ON CUSTOMERS LOANS, SOUTHERN AND WESTERN CITIES BANKER S ACCEPTANCE RATES, NEW YORK CITY INTEREST RATES ON FEDERAL LAND BANK LOANS, TWELVE FEDERAL LAND BANKS DISCOUNT RATES, FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF NEW YORK FEDERAL RESERVE BANK DISCOUNT RATES, MINNEAPOLIS FEDERAL RESERVE BANK DISCOUNT RATE, DALLAS INDEX OF YIELDS OF HIGH GRADE CORPORATE AND MUNICIPAL BONDS INDEX OF YIELDS OF HIGH GRADE MUNICIPAL BONDS YIELDS OF HIGH GRADE RAILROAD BONDS INDEX OF YIELDS OF HIGH GRADE PUBLIC UTILITY BONDS YIELD ON HIGH GRADE INDUSTRIAL BONDS, AAA RATING WEIGHTED AVERAGE OF OPEN MARKET RATES, NEW YORK CITY BANK RATES ON CUSTOMER LOANS, LEADING CITIES TOTAL RATES CHARGED CUSTOMERS AND OPEN MARKET RATES, COMBINED YIELD ON LONG-TERM UNITED STATES BONDS YIELDS ON CORPORATE BONDS, HIGHEST RATING YIELDS ON CORPORATE BONDS, LOWEST RATING DIVIDEND YIELD OF PREFERRED STOCK ON THE NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE TOTAL GOLD RESERVES OF FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS CASH RESERVES OF FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS RESERVES HELD AT FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS, ALL MEMBER BANKS NOTES IN CIRCULATION, FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS TOTAL BILLS AND SECURITIES HELD BY FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS BILLS DISCOUNTED, FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS GOVERNMENT SECURITIES HELD, FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS TOTAL DEPOSITS, FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS RATIO OF RESERVES TO NOTE AND DEPOSIT LIABILITIES, FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS MONETARY GOLD STOCK NET DEMAND DEPOSITS, REPORTING MEMBER BANKS, FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM TIME DEPOSITS, REPORTING MEMBER BANKS, FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM CURRENCY HELD BY THE TREASURY PERCENTAGE OF RESERVES HELD TO RESERVES REQUIRED, ALL MEMBER BANKS, FRB SYSTEM NEW YORK CITY VAULT CASH, ALL BANKS EXCEPT FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS INVESTMENTS OTHER THAN UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT SECURITIES, REPORTING FEDERAL RESERVE MEMBER BANKS IN 101 LEADING CITIES TOTAL CURRENCY OUTSIDE THE TREASURY AND FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS, END OF MONTH GOLD HELD IN THE TREASURY AND FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS, END OF MONEY STOCK, COMMERICAL BANKS PLUS CURRENCY HELD BY PUBLIC TOTAL DEPOSITS, ALL COMMERCIAL BANKS ADJUSTED DEMAND DEPOSITS, ALL COMMERCIAL BANKS DEPOSITS IN MUTUAL SAVINGS BANKS AND POSTAL SAVINGS SYSTEM, END OF MONTH ADJ. DEMAND DEPOSITS, ALL COMMERCIAL BANKS,CURRENCY HELD BY PUBLIC ADJ. DEMAND DEPOSITS, ALL BANKS,TOTAL TIME DEPOSITS, CURRENCY HELD BY PUBLIC RATIO OF CURRENCY HELD BY THE PUBLIC TO ADJUSTED DEMAND DEPOSITS, TIME DEPOSITS, ALL COMMERCIAL BANKS, PLUS CURRENCY HELD BY THE PUBLIC PERCENT CHANGE IN TOTAL MONEY SUPPLY, MONTH-TO-MONTH CHANGE MONEY STOCK, MONTH-TO-MONTH CHANGE

1 1 1 1 1 1
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1 1 1 1
5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5
5 5
5 5 5
5 5 5
5
5 5 5 5 5
5
5
5
1
1

0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0
0 1 0
0 0 0
0
0 0 1 1 0
1
1
1
1

SA = 0: no seasonal adjustment or SA in the source; SA = 1: seasonally adjusted by the authors. TC = 1: no transformation; TC = 5: 1st difference of logs.

33

C Tables

Table 3: Estimated R2s from regressions of individual series on FAVAR (DR model).

Description
PR IMNF CPI DR
Total rates charged Bankers rates (Customer loans) Open market rates CommPR Yield:Corporate bonds Yields: Corporate bonds Rates on custom. Loans
Rates on custom. Loans (SW) 90day time to money Rates on custom. Loans (NW) Yields: Public utility Banker s accept. Rate DR Dallas DR SF DR Minneapolis Yields: Industrial bonds Call money rate Yield: Long-term bonds Yields: Railroad bonds Dividend yields Yields: Munic Interest rates FED bank loans PR IPRGD WSP: food PR IPDG Yield:Corporate bonds (LG) Index business activity

R2
1
1
1
1
1
0.99 0.99 0.99 0.99 0.99 0.99 0.99 0.99 0.98 0.98 0.98 0.97 0.96 0.96 0.95 0.95 0.95 0.95
0.91
0.88 0.87 0.81 0.78 0.77

Description
Production (durable mnfct) Industrial Production/Trade Industrial activity Business activity growth Index of WSP: WSP: Foods General price level Employment: Machinery CPI less food PR IPTG Pig Iron Employment: Manufacturing Business activity pittsburgh Index manufacturing prod. Steel ingot Cost of Living index Payrolls wkly: Manufacturing Factory payrolls: Machinery Factory payrolls: steel Employment: Steel PR IPDCG WSP Industrial (sensitive Raw) WSP: Textiles
PR IPCGLA
Employment: Paper WSP Industrial commodities Employment: Lumber WSP: Building material Employment: Steel

R2 0.71 0.69 0.68 0.67 0.61 0.6 0.56 0.54 0.53 0.53 0.51 0.51 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.49 0.49 0.49 0.47 0.47 0.45 0.44 0.44
0.4
0.39 0.39 0.37 0.37 0.37

Data show the variance decomposition of the factors through the estimated R2s for each indicator series based on 4 extracted factors.

34

Table 4: Forecast error variance decomposition of a contractionary monetary policy shock

Commercial Paper Rate Model

Horizon

0 1 2 3 6 12 24 48

CommPR

56776655

FRB Industrial Production

5 6 8 8 8 9 9 10

CPI inflation

65 48 46 44 43 43 43 42

S&P 500

9 11 13 14 15 15 16 16

Wages

12 14 15 15 15 15 16 16

Orders of Machinery Tools

9 13 14 18 18 20 20 20

Discount Rate Model

Horizon

0 1 2 3 6 12 24 48

Discount Rate

45555666

FRB Industrial Production

44566779

CPI inflation

94 56 53 52 48 46 45 43

S&P 500

5 6 6 7 8 9 9 10

Wages

10 11 11 11 11 12 12 13

Orders of Machinery Tools 6 7 7 9 10 10 11 11

M0 Model

Horizon

0 1 2 3 6 12 24 48

M0 4 4 4 4 3 3 3 3

FRB Industrial Production 15 18 19 18 18 20 21 20

CPI inflation

54 38 38 37 37 37 36 35

S&P 500

16 18 20 22 22 22 22 21

Wages

10 10 12 12 12 13 12 12

Orders of Machinery Tools 18 17 20 23 23 23 23 22

M1 Model

Horizon

0 1 2 3 6 12 24 48

M1 17 19 19 18 17 18 17 16

FRB Industrial Production 16 17 17 17 17 17 16 16

CPI inflation

89 60 55 54 50 48 47 42

S&P 500

19 20 21 22 22 22 23 23

Wages

16 17 18 18 17 17 16 16

Orders of Machinery Tools 22 23 26 27 26 26 26 27

M2 Model

Horizon

0 1 2 3 6 12 24 48

M2 3 3 2 2 2 2 3 3

FRB Industrial Production

44566677

CPI inflation

87 48 45 40 38 37 37 36

S&P 500

5 6 6 8 8 9 9 10

Wages

10 9 11 10 11 10 11 11

Orders of Machinery Tools 7 7 8 9 10 11 11 12

Percentage forecast error variance decompositions of a contractionary monetary policy shock for the 3 models considered. The respective 3 blocks report the results for the discount rate model, commercial paper rates model, M0 model the M1 model and the M2 model. The variables considered are the same as for the impulse response analysis, namely the Discount Rate, the commercial Paper rate, the growth in FRB index for production in manufacturing, the CPI inflation, S&P is the Standard and Poor 500 index and the index of orders in Machinery and Tools. The values denote the variance explained in the respective series due to a monetary policy shock in percent based on the median of the posterior draws.

35

Table 5: RMSFE at horizon 1 for different models considered.

36

Horizon: 1
Before Great Crash Before 1st Banking Crisis Before German Banking Crisis Before Devaluation of £ Before "Banking Holiday"
Before Great Crash Before 1st Banking Crisis Before German Banking Crisis Before Devaluation of £ Before "Banking Holiday"
Before Great Crash Before 1st Banking Crisis Before German Banking Crisis Before Devaluation of £ Before "Banking Holiday"
Before Great Crash Before 1st Banking Crisis Before German Banking Crisis Before Devaluation of £ Before "Banking Holiday"
Before Great Crash Before 1st Banking Crisis Before German Banking Crisis Before Devaluation of £ Before "Banking Holiday"
Before Great Crash Before 1st Banking Crisis Before German Banking Crisis Before Devaluation of £ Before "Banking Holiday"

FRB Ind. Prod. CPI Inflation Commercial Paper Rate Model
5.85,[12.01,2.36] 1.27,[2.66,0.69] 8.40,[16.42,2.85] 2.04,[3.80,0.90]
4.59,[9.26,2.03] 1.07,[2.01,0.65] 3.23,[6.73,1.78] 0.91,[1.53,0.63] 2.67,[4.77,1.74] 0.75,[1.15,0.61]
Discount Rate Model 7.03,[9.79,4.83] 1.11,[1.58,0.93] 4.81,[8.17,3.64] 1.01,[1.47,0.91]
5.31,[7.12,4.05] 0.96,[1.14,0.91] 6.05,[8.43,4.32] 0.98,[1.25,0.91] 5.32,[6.70,4.22] 0.96,[1.10,0.91]
M0 Model 2.88,[3.50,2.69] 1.03,[1.16,0.99] 2.82,[3.35,2.69] 1.02,[1.11,0.99]
2.83,[3.22,2.68] 1.02,[1.11,0.99] 2.88,[3.42,2.69] 1.03,[1.14,0.99] 3.20,[4.04,2.74] 1.02,[1.14,0.99]
M1 Model 2.48,[2.87,2.38] 0.81,[0.96,0.76] 2.55,[3.08,2.39] 0.83,[1.03,0.77]
2.55,[3.15,2.39] 0.82,[0.99,0.77] 2.49,[2.83,2.38] 0.82,[0.95,0.77] 2.51,[3.00,2.38] 0.92,[1.12,0.78]
M2 Model 5.16,[5.52,5.04] 0.44,[0.63,0.38] 5.11,[5.42,5.04] 0.45,[0.64,0.38]
5.13,[5.44,5.04] 0.47,[0.72,0.38] 5.16,[5.54,5.05] 0.54,[0.87,0.40] 5.23,[5.87,5.05] 0.48,[0.71,0.39]
No Policy Instrument Model 5.72,[6.18,5.63] 3.02,[3.71,2.70] 4.96,[5.84,4.52] 7.50,[7.89,7.40]
4.97,[5.28,4.89] 7.45,[7.90,7.25] 4.11,[4.67,3.95] 10.90,[12.15,9.67] 5.04,[5.39,4.94] 5.58,[6.23,5.23]

Orders
26.35,[41.49,15.50] 27.24,[38.82,17.58] 20.62,[33.04,13.66] 20.05,[31.91,13.58] 16.33,[21.89,12.88]
26.21,[32.67,21.52] 22.33,[26.70,20.50] 22.57,[26.96,20.92] 24.44,[30.78,21.89] 22.04,[24.33,20.52]
22.32,[23.73,21.51] 22.89,[24.05,22.09] 24.32,[26.97,22.28] 24.95,[27.34,23.23] 22.99,[25.03,21.98]
24.33,[25.32,23.76] 25.26,[26.32,24.38] 25.91,[27.98,24.72] 24.46,[26.35,23.21] 23.68,[25.29,22.94]
22.77,[24.04,22.02] 24.12,[25.63,22.84] 23.70,[25.13,22.81] 27.35,[30.14,25.17] 24.74,[27.02,22.98]
2.94,[4.96,2.17] 3.73,[5.02,2.91] 2.90,[4.06,2.37] 3.23,[4.69,2.53] 2.77,[4.11,2.05]

Policy variable
133.09,[145.70,129.35] 133.78,[148.89,129.46] 130.47,[135.20,129.12] 130.23,[134.53,129.13] 131.01,[137.08,129.20]
216.26,[218.28,215.25] 222.20,[227.63,218.69] 227.06,[231.73,223.60] 229.63,[235.72,224.73] 225.14,[229.18,221.86]
2.36,[2.45,2.34] 2.36,[2.45,2.34] 2.52,[2.69,2.40] 2.47,[2.65,2.37] 2.49,[2.85,2.35]
3.73,[3.76,3.72] 3.76,[3.88,3.72] 3.75,[3.87,3.72] 3.75,[3.83,3.72] 3.75,[3.84,3.72]
2.10,[2.25,2.05] 2.08,[2.18,2.05] 2.08,[2.21,2.05] 18.00,[19.17,17.31] 2.09,[2.23,2.05]

The table reports the median root mean squared forecast errors (RMSFE) and its 68% highest posterior density in brackets for the respective models under consideration.

Table 6: RMSFE at horizon 3 for different models considered.

Horizon: 3
Before Great Crash Before 1st Banking Crisis Before German Banking Crisis Before Devaluation of £ Before "Banking Holiday"
Before Great Crash Before 1st Banking Crisis Before German Banking Crisis Before Devaluation of £ Before "Banking Holiday"
Before Great Crash Before 1st Banking Crisis Before German Banking Crisis Before Devaluation of £ Before "Banking Holiday"
Before Great Crash Before 1st Banking Crisis Before German Banking Crisis Before Devaluation of £ Before "Banking Holiday"
Before Great Crash Before 1st Banking Crisis Before German Banking Crisis Before Devaluation of £ Before "Banking Holiday"
Before Great Crash Before 1st Banking Crisis Before German Banking Crisis Before Devaluation of £ Before "Banking Holiday"

FRB Ind. Prod. CPI Inflation Commercial Paper Rate Model
10.25,[18.37,5.08] 2.27,[4.19,1.25] 13.40,[22.12,6.76] 2.86,[4.69,1.57]
7.02,[13.53,3.43] 1.60,[2.87,0.92] 5.33,[10.14,2.84] 1.37,[2.31,0.82] 4.58,[7.70,2.60] 1.28,[1.92,0.85]
Discount Rate Model 8.09,[11.60,5.43] 1.46,[2.26,1.04] 5.54,[9.91,4.06] 1.20,[1.99,0.95]
5.43,[7.39,4.26] 1.04,[1.36,0.91] 6.26,[9.06,4.73] 1.14,[1.62,0.93] 5.35,[6.95,4.33] 1.02,[1.28,0.90]
M0 Model 3.17,[4.05,2.72] 1.07,[1.26,0.97] 3.11,[4.16,2.67] 1.04,[1.24,0.96]
3.00,[3.53,2.70] 1.02,[1.17,0.95] 3.15,[3.80,2.78] 1.05,[1.23,0.96] 3.55,[4.67,2.86] 1.08,[1.29,0.97]
M1 Model 3.34,[4.45,2.61] 0.92,[1.15,0.79] 3.61,[4.94,2.80] 0.96,[1.18,0.81]
3.27,[4.41,2.58] 0.90,[1.13,0.77] 3.09,[3.77,2.59] 0.85,[0.99,0.76] 3.43,[4.76,2.67] 0.94,[1.16,0.80]
M2 Model 5.24,[6.04,4.84] 0.66,[0.98,0.47] 5.10,[5.90,4.80] 0.67,[0.99,0.47]
5.35,[6.24,4.90] 0.68,[0.97,0.47] 5.20,[6.01,4.83] 0.88,[1.39,0.55] 5.46,[6.75,4.89] 0.67,[1.01,0.47]
No Policy Instrument Model 5.67,[6.27,5.37] 3.19,[4.03,2.76] 5.13,[6.16,4.53] 7.24,[7.81,7.00]
5.52,[6.49,4.90] 11.41,[12.48,10.40] 4.33,[5.07,3.91] 10.32,[11.48,9.19] 5.11,[5.61,4.84] 6.33,[7.20,5.67]

Orders
26.62,[41.01,16.22] 29.32,[41.70,18.86] 21.16,[33.21,13.88] 19.91,[31.60,13.43] 17.64,[23.50,13.65]
25.03,[31.20,20.66] 21.51,[26.03,19.64] 21.83,[26.03,20.05] 23.67,[29.80,21.08] 21.27,[23.85,19.61]
22.91,[23.97,22.14] 22.23,[23.25,21.58] 23.28,[25.59,21.71] 23.88,[25.90,22.55] 22.47,[24.09,21.60]
26.02,[27.90,24.85] 28.84,[30.39,27.50] 29.59,[31.86,27.61] 28.01,[30.11,26.34] 26.87,[29.12,25.49]
22.60,[23.67,21.94] 23.36,[24.65,22.38] 23.06,[24.29,22.30] 26.19,[28.72,24.36] 23.87,[25.80,22.53]
3.04,[4.98,2.21] 3.65,[4.88,2.80] 3.12,[4.24,2.58] 3.57,[4.94,2.87] 2.95,[4.18,2.21]

Policy variable
175.41,[277.21,127.55] 173.18,[280.22,128.50] 137.95,[187.04,122.88] 131.54,[172.45,122.19] 162.30,[230.61,127.54]
207.81,[218.92,204.04] 217.85,[239.00,207.57] 236.14,[254.55,222.72] 244.87,[269.52,225.58] 231.85,[249.14,218.80]
2.26,[2.38,2.21] 2.26,[2.39,2.20] 2.40,[2.59,2.28] 2.41,[2.61,2.28] 2.63,[3.12,2.33]
3.50,[3.56,3.47] 3.61,[3.79,3.51] 3.62,[3.82,3.52] 3.55,[3.66,3.49] 3.56,[3.67,3.50]
2.09,[2.34,1.97] 2.02,[2.17,1.95] 2.06,[2.24,1.96] 18.51,[21.92,16.51] 2.04,[2.24,1.95]

37

The table reports the median root mean squared forecast errors (RMSFE) and its 68% highest posterior density in brackets for the respective models under consideration.

Table 7: RMSFE at horizon 6 for different models considered.

38

Horizon: 6
Before Great Crash Before 1st Banking Crisis Before German Banking Crisis Before Devaluation of £ Before "Banking Holiday"
Before Great Crash Before 1st Banking Crisis Before German Banking Crisis Before Devaluation of £ Before "Banking Holiday"
Before Great Crash Before 1st Banking Crisis Before German Banking Crisis Before Devaluation of £ Before "Banking Holiday"
Before Great Crash Before 1st Banking Crisis Before German Banking Crisis Before Devaluation of £ Before "Banking Holiday"
Before Great Crash Before 1st Banking Crisis Before German Banking Crisis Before Devaluation of £ Before "Banking Holiday"
Before Great Crash Before 1st Banking Crisis Before German Banking Crisis Before Devaluation of £ Before "Banking Holiday"

FRB Ind. Prod. CPI Inflation Commercial Paper Rate Model
12.30,[20.24,7.05] 3.43,[5.87,1.94] 14.84,[22.48,8.92] 3.31,[4.96,2.12]
8.15,[13.96,4.58] 2.03,[3.40,1.21] 6.72,[11.28,3.80] 1.68,[2.83,1.02] 5.64,[8.82,3.55] 2.22,[3.24,1.43]
Discount Rate Model 8.43,[11.62,6.04] 1.79,[2.79,1.19] 6.24,[11.07,4.50] 1.35,[2.45,0.99]
6.35,[8.21,5.04] 1.14,[1.52,0.95] 7.41,[10.01,5.72] 1.30,[1.93,1.00] 6.06,[7.54,4.97] 1.11,[1.41,0.93]
M0 Model 3.90,[4.99,3.16] 1.15,[1.46,0.99] 3.97,[5.39,3.08] 1.19,[1.52,1.00]
3.32,[4.03,2.86] 1.08,[1.31,0.95] 3.77,[4.65,3.09] 1.15,[1.38,0.98] 4.42,[5.60,3.53] 1.21,[1.45,1.03]
M1 Model 3.59,[4.69,2.81] 1.10,[1.44,0.87] 4.08,[5.47,3.14] 1.29,[1.64,1.03]
3.53,[4.61,2.83] 1.04,[1.30,0.86] 3.34,[4.11,2.74] 0.95,[1.15,0.81] 3.77,[5.04,2.93] 1.06,[1.31,0.86]
M2 Model 5.26,[6.26,4.73] 0.80,[1.21,0.57] 5.14,[6.07,4.63] 0.83,[1.13,0.62]
5.58,[6.69,4.91] 0.88,[1.22,0.64] 5.15,[6.00,4.69] 1.02,[1.48,0.70] 5.54,[6.72,4.79] 0.82,[1.17,0.58]
No Policy Instrument Model 5.54,[6.26,5.12] 3.81,[4.97,3.15] 5.36,[6.55,4.58] 7.01,[7.86,6.63]
5.34,[6.28,4.72] 10.59,[11.64,9.65] 4.37,[5.12,3.85] 9.62,[10.70,8.58] 5.24,[5.88,4.79] 7.15,[8.03,6.38]

Orders
28.70,[44.83,17.80] 29.57,[42.01,19.50] 21.27,[32.70,13.99] 20.31,[31.42,13.67] 19.54,[27.56,14.41]
24.53,[30.89,20.29] 21.78,[26.41,19.68] 22.82,[26.73,20.43] 24.83,[30.57,21.74] 22.20,[25.34,20.06]
24.44,[25.63,23.73] 25.43,[26.70,24.37] 26.37,[28.55,24.71] 27.20,[29.19,25.62] 25.37,[27.19,24.24]
25.38,[26.62,24.56] 26.85,[28.30,25.66] 27.55,[29.62,25.82] 26.13,[28.00,24.69] 25.23,[27.11,24.26]
22.44,[23.67,21.83] 23.83,[25.42,22.53] 23.89,[25.54,22.63] 26.00,[28.39,24.09] 23.92,[26.03,22.55]
3.17,[5.11,2.30] 3.62,[4.83,2.80] 3.47,[4.65,2.83] 3.43,[4.78,2.75] 3.33,[4.44,2.68]

Policy variable
289.42,[542.88,150.07] 285.84,[545.34,152.04] 191.07,[350.66,124.44] 166.75,[301.88,119.88] 257.96,[412.17,147.00]
227.52,[280.63,196.91] 209.59,[262.18,194.64] 229.69,[262.91,209.85] 242.30,[287.81,213.92] 229.05,[257.82,207.66]
2.26,[2.44,2.14] 2.22,[2.42,2.11] 2.26,[2.45,2.14] 2.26,[2.46,2.13] 2.61,[3.10,2.27]
3.25,[3.33,3.20] 3.49,[3.73,3.34] 3.40,[3.61,3.28] 3.33,[3.46,3.25] 3.35,[3.49,3.26]
2.13,[2.51,1.93] 1.96,[2.17,1.85] 2.00,[2.22,1.87] 19.76,[25.34,16.08] 1.98,[2.21,1.85]

The table reports the median root mean squared forecast errors (RMSFE) and its 68% highest posterior density in brackets for the respective models under consideration.

Table 8: RMSFE at horizon 12 for different models considered.

Horizon: 12
Before Great Crash Before 1st Banking Crisis Before German Banking Crisis Before Devaluation of £ Before "Banking Holiday"
Before Great Crash Before 1st Banking Crisis Before German Banking Crisis Before Devaluation of £ Before "Banking Holiday"
Before Great Crash Before 1st Banking Crisis Before German Banking Crisis Before Devaluation of £ Before "Banking Holiday"
Before Great Crash Before 1st Banking Crisis Before German Banking Crisis Before Devaluation of £ Before "Banking Holiday"
Before Great Crash Before 1st Banking Crisis Before German Banking Crisis Before Devaluation of £ Before "Banking Holiday"
Before Great Crash Before 1st Banking Crisis Before German Banking Crisis Before Devaluation of £ Before "Banking Holiday"

FRB Ind. Prod. CPI Inflation Commercial Paper Rate Model
13.56,[20.31,9.14] 4.07,[6.61,2.51] 15.49,[22.26,10.58] 3.52,[5.04,2.46]
8.94,[13.76,5.68] 2.38,[3.73,1.53] 7.35,[11.43,4.60] 2.03,[3.15,1.31] 6.95,[10.22,4.66] 2.58,[3.64,1.70]
Discount Rate Model 8.55,[11.55,6.37] 1.99,[2.91,1.40] 7.14,[11.58,5.54] 1.53,[2.80,1.10]
6.79,[8.29,5.68] 1.41,[1.85,1.12] 7.49,[9.74,6.07] 1.60,[2.31,1.21] 7.00,[8.29,5.98] 1.40,[1.73,1.15]
M0 Model 3.96,[5.04,3.24] 1.26,[1.64,1.03] 4.43,[5.75,3.60] 1.59,[2.08,1.24]
3.37,[4.05,2.87] 1.23,[1.54,1.00] 3.88,[4.84,3.21] 1.37,[1.65,1.14] 4.66,[5.78,3.77] 1.36,[1.66,1.12]
M1 Model 3.65,[4.69,2.92] 1.16,[1.50,0.92] 4.39,[5.66,3.54] 1.47,[1.84,1.20]
3.70,[4.71,3.00] 1.16,[1.45,0.94] 3.54,[4.31,2.95] 1.05,[1.25,0.87] 4.15,[5.33,3.29] 1.15,[1.44,0.92]
M2 Model 5.11,[6.07,4.50] 1.14,[1.62,0.85] 5.23,[6.14,4.59] 1.31,[1.62,1.05]
5.66,[6.82,4.95] 1.33,[1.68,1.06] 5.15,[6.16,4.53] 1.28,[1.78,0.95] 5.39,[6.59,4.64] 1.10,[1.45,0.84]
No Policy Instrument Model 5.44,[6.24,4.91] 3.92,[5.16,3.22] 5.84,[7.14,4.92] 9.12,[10.24,8.31]
5.01,[5.83,4.41] 9.36,[10.25,8.54] 4.52,[5.29,3.91] 8.57,[9.56,7.67] 5.06,[5.68,4.60] 6.55,[7.36,5.85]

Orders
33.09,[52.76,20.59] 31.20,[45.39,21.72] 22.91,[34.13,15.93] 21.52,[31.66,14.99] 25.61,[37.56,17.56]
26.35,[32.83,22.68] 25.29,[30.96,22.75] 26.29,[30.48,23.67] 27.59,[33.20,24.49] 26.75,[30.33,24.05]
23.71,[24.88,22.95] 24.33,[25.84,23.32] 24.66,[26.54,23.29] 25.42,[27.24,24.02] 24.35,[26.11,23.19]
24.43,[25.91,23.61] 25.84,[27.49,24.66] 26.13,[28.22,24.56] 25.09,[26.78,23.68] 24.27,[26.30,23.14]
25.14,[26.68,24.26] 27.74,[29.80,26.31] 28.16,[30.33,26.48] 28.12,[30.57,26.42] 26.76,[28.85,25.30]
3.44,[5.41,2.56] 4.02,[5.44,3.19] 3.35,[4.72,2.64] 3.53,[4.86,2.79] 3.54,[4.58,2.85]

Policy variable
457.83,[903.31,217.92] 463.94,[891.51,217.75] 322.01,[632.84,155.79] 268.69,[558.88,141.01] 337.30,[582.45,171.61]
269.33,[390.45,196.51] 212.80,[370.87,181.15] 218.65,[263.32,196.30] 240.79,[323.19,206.28] 212.68,[245.60,191.29]
2.10,[2.30,1.96] 2.09,[2.30,1.95] 2.15,[2.39,1.99] 2.20,[2.46,2.02] 2.68,[3.17,2.31]
2.93,[3.06,2.85] 3.40,[3.71,3.19] 3.18,[3.42,3.02] 3.08,[3.24,2.96] 3.14,[3.35,2.98]
2.48,[2.85,2.19] 2.11,[2.34,1.95] 2.11,[2.36,1.93] 22.03,[29.84,16.09] 2.09,[2.34,1.92]

39

The table reports the median root mean squared forecast errors (RMSFE) and its 68% highest posterior density in brackets for the respective models under consideration.

D Figures, Whole Observation Period 1919-1939
D.1 Reduced Form Results
Figure 1: Extracted Factors with 95% probability bands
In order to access the uncertainty associated with the sampled posterior factors we report the 95 % probability bands around the posterior median of the respective sampled factors. These are fairly tight indicating a low degree of sampling uncertainty. We furthermore checked the convergence by monitoring the sampler visually through trace plots. Figure (3)) shows how the parameter estimates evolve in the sampling process and helps to check whether there are jumps in the level of the respective parameter. Furthermore we plotted the first half of the kept draws against the second half to check whether the sampler has converged and whether the whole density of the distribution is represented. Figure (2) shows hardly any deviation, suggesting that the sampler converged already in the first half.
40

Figure 2: Graphical convergence plot for extracted factors
In order to monitor the graphical convergence of the sampler we plot the first half of the kept draws against the second half of the draws of the sampled posterior factors and check the degree of deviation. This is another strategy among many others in order to check the convergence properties of the sampler. If a very small degree or even no deviation is visible one can gain confidence that the sampler went through the whole distribution and has converged to the target distribution and did not stuck in a local mode. From the results depicted on the four panels one can see that problems with the convergence of the sampler is not an issue.

41

Figure 3: Trace Plot for selected elements in BT
Trace plot of state coefficients. Graphical monitoring of convergence along the sample sampled Markov chain.

42

D.2 The Surprise Component of Monetary Policy
Figure 4: IRF and FEVD to Monetary Policy Shock, DR model, Full Sample Period: 1919:02 - 1939:02, identified by sign restrictions
43

Figure 5: IRF and FEVD to Monetary Policy Shock, CommPR model, Full Sample Period: 1919:02 - 1939:02, identified by sign restrictions
44

Figure 6: IRF and FEVD to Monetary Policy Shock, M0 model, Full Sample Period: 1919:02 - 1939:02, identified by sign restrictions
45

Figure 7: IRF and FEVD to a Monetary Policy Shock in the M1 model for Fullsample Period: 1919:02 - 1939:02 identified with sign restriction
46

Figure 8: IRF and FEVD to a Monetary Policy Shock in the M2 model for Fullsample Period: 1919:02 - 1939:02 identified with sign restriction
47

D.3 Identifying the Monetary Policy Reaction Function
Figure 9: IRF and FEVD to an Aggregate Supply Shock, DR model, Full Sample Period: 1919:02 - 1939:02, identified by sign restrictions
48

Figure 10: IRF and FEVD to an Aggregate Supply Shock, CommPR model, Full Sample Period: 1919:02 - 1939:02, identified by sign restrictions
49

Figure 11: IRF and FEVD to an Aggregate Supply Shock, M0 model, Full Sample Period: 1919:02 - 1939:02, identified by sign restrictions
50

Figure 12: IRF and FEVD to an Aggregate Supply Shock, M1 model, Full Sample Period: 1919:02 - 1939:02, identified by sign restrictions
51

Figure 13: IRF and FEVD to an Aggregate Supply Shock, M2 model, Full Sample Period: 1919:02 - 1939:02, identified by sign restrictions
52

Figure 14: IRF and FEVD to an Aggregate Demand Shock, DR model, Full Sample Period: 1919:02 - 1939:02, identified by sign restrictions
53

Figure 15: IRF and FEVD to an Aggregate Demand Shock, CommPR model, Full Sample Period: 1919:02 - 1939:02, identified by sign restrictions
54

Figure 16: IRF and FEVD to an Aggregate Demand Shock, M0 model, Full Sample Period: 1919:02 - 1939:02, identified by sign restrictions
55

Figure 17: IRF and FEVD to an Aggregate Demand Shock, M1 model, Full Sample Period: 1919:02 - 1939:02, identified by sign restrictions
56

Figure 18: IRF and FEVD to an Aggregate Demand Shock, M2 model, Full Sample Period: 1919:02 - 1939:02, identified by sign restrictions
57

Figure 19: Conditional Forecasts WITHOUT policy instrument

Before the Crash in Sep 1929: [02:1919-09:1929]

Before the 1st Banking Crisis: [02:1919-11:1930]

58

Before German Banking Crisis: [02:1919-06:1931]

Forecasting WITHOUT Monetary Policy Instruments

FRB Production Growth

0.1 0
-0.1

0.05 0
-0.05 -0.1

CPI Inflation

0.1 0
-0.1

0.1 0
-0.1 -0.2

Orders in Machinery
0.5 0
-0.5
0.5 0
-0.5

0.1 0
-0.1

0.1 0
-0.1 -0.2

0.5 0
-0.5

0.1 0
-0.1

0.1 0
-0.1 -0.2

0.5 0
-0.5

0.1

0

-0.1

1930

1932

1934

0.1

0

-0.1 1930

1932

1934

0.5 0
-0.5 1930

1932

1934

Before devaluation of the British £
[02:1919-08:1931]

Before Roosevelts "Banking Holiday": [02:1919-02:1933]

Figure 20: Conditional Forecasts: Commercial Paper Rate Model

Before the Crash in Sep 1929: [02:1919-09:1929]

Before the 1st Banking Crisis: [02:1919-11:1930]

59

Before German Banking Crisis: [02:1919-06:1931]

Forecasting with Commercial Paper Rate Model

FRB Production Growth
0.4 0.2
0 -0.2 -0.4 -0.6

0.1 0
-0.1

0.2 0
-0.2 -0.4 -0.6

0.1 0
-0.1

CPI Inflation

0.2 0
-0.2 -0.4

0.1 0.05
0 -0.05

Orders in Machinery
1
0
-1

Commercial Paper Rate
0.2 0.1
0 -0.1

0.5 0
-0.5
0.5 0
-0.5

0.1 0
-0.1 -0.2
0.1 0
-0.1

0.2 0
-0.2

0.05 0
-0.05

0.5 0
-0.5

0.1 0
-0.1

0.2
0
-0.2 1930

1932

1934

0.05
0
-0.05 1930

1932

1934

0.5

0

-0.5

1930

1932

1934

0.05
0
-0.05
-0.1 1930

1932

1934

Before devaluation of the British £
[02:1919-08:1931]

Before Roosevelts "Banking Holiday": [02:1919-02:1933]

Figure 21: Conditional Forecasts: Discount Rate Model

Before the Crash in Sep 1929: [02:1919-09:1929]

Before the 1st Banking Crisis: [02:1919-11:1930]

60

Before German Banking Crisis: [02:1919-06:1931]

Forecasting with Discount Rate Model

FRB Production Growth
0.2 0
-0.2

0.05 0
-0.05

CPI Inflation

0.3 0.2 0.1
0 -0.1

0.05 0
-0.05

0.2 0.1
0 -0.1
0.2 0.1
0 -0.1

0.1

0

-0.1

1930

1932

1934

0.04 0.02
0 -0.02 -0.04
0.05

0

-0.05

0.04 0.02
0 -0.02 -0.04

1930

1932

1934

Orders in Machinery
0.5
0
-0.5

0.5 0
-0.5

0.5 0
-0.5

0.5 0
-0.5

0.5 0
-0.5 1930

1932

1934

0.08 0.06 0.04 0.02
0 -0.02 -0.04

Discount Rate

0.05 0
-0.05 -0.1
0.05
0
-0.05

0.05 0
-0.05

0.04 0.02
0 -0.02 -0.04

1930

1932

1934

Before devaluation of the British £
[02:1919-08:1931]

Before Roosevelts "Banking Holiday": [02:1919-02:1933]

Figure 22: Conditional Forecasts: M0 Model

Before the Crash in Sep 1929: [02:1919-09:1929]

Before the 1st Banking Crisis: [02:1919-11:1930]

61

Before German Banking Crisis: [02:1919-06:1931]

Forecasting with Monetary Base Model

FRB Production Growth
0.1 0
-0.1

0.02 0
-0.02

CPI Inflation

Orders in Machinery
0.5
0
-0.5

0.1 0.05
0 -0.05

Monetary Base

0.1 0
-0.1
0.1 0
-0.1

0.04 0.02
0 -0.02 -0.04
0.02 0
-0.02

0.5 0
-0.5
0.5 0
-0.5

0.1 0.05
0 -0.05
0.1 0.05
0 -0.05

0.1 0
-0.1

0.02 0
-0.02

0.5 0
-0.5

0.1 0.05
0 -0.05

0.1

0

-0.1

1930

1932

1934

0.02 0
-0.02 -0.04
1930

1932

1934

0.5 0
-0.5 1930

1932

1934

0.1 0.05
0 -0.05

1930

1932

1934

Before devaluation of the British £
[02:1919-08:1931]

Before Roosevelts "Banking Holiday": [02:1919-02:1933]

Figure 23: Conditional Forecasts: M1 Model

Before the Crash in Sep 1929: [02:1919-09:1929]

Before the 1st Banking Crisis: [02:1919-11:1930]

62

Before German Banking Crisis: [02:1919-06:1931]

Forecasting with M1 Model

FRB Production Growth
0.1 0
-0.1

0.02 0
-0.02

CPI Inflation

0.1 0
-0.1

0.04 0.02
0 -0.02

Orders in Machinery
0.5
0
-0.5

0.05 0
-0.05 -0.1

0.5 0
-0.5

0.05 0
-0.05 -0.1

M1

0.1 0
-0.1

0.02 0
-0.02

0.5 0
-0.5

0.05 0
-0.05 -0.1

0.1 0
-0.1

0.02 0
-0.02

0.5 0
-0.5

0.05 0
-0.05 -0.1

0.1

0

-0.1

1930

1932

1934

0.02 0
-0.02 -0.04
1930

1932

1934

0.5 0
-0.5 1930

1932

1934

0.05 0
-0.05 -0.1 1930

1932

1934

Before devaluation of the British £
[02:1919-08:1931]

Before Roosevelts "Banking Holiday": [02:1919-02:1933]

Figure 24: Conditional Forecasts: M2 Model

Before the Crash in Sep 1929: [02:1919-09:1929]

Before the 1st Banking Crisis: [02:1919-11:1930]

63

Before German Banking Crisis: [02:1919-06:1931]

Forecasting with M2 Model

FRB Production Growth
0.1 0
-0.1

0.04 0.02
0 -0.02

CPI Inflation

Orders in Machinery
0.5
0
-0.5

0.05 0
-0.05

M2

0.2 0.1
0 -0.1
0.2 0.1
0 -0.1
0.1 0
-0.1

0.1

0

-0.1

1930

1932

1934

0.04 0.02
0 -0.02

0.5 0
-0.5

0.02 0
-0.02 -0.04 -0.06 -0.08

0.04 0.02
0 -0.02 -0.04
0.04 0.02
0 -0.02

0.5 0
-0.5
0.5 0
-0.5

0.02 0
-0.02 -0.04 -0.06 -0.08
0.6 0.4 0.2
0 -0.2

0.02 0
-0.02 -0.04
1930

1932

1934

0.5 0
-0.5 1930

1932

1934

0.02 0
-0.02 -0.04 -0.06 -0.08

1930

1932

1934

Before devaluation of the British £
[02:1919-08:1931]

Before Roosevelts "Banking Holiday": [02:1919-02:1933]

SFB 649 Discussion Paper Series 2009
For a complete list of Discussion Papers published by the SFB 649, please visit http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de.
001 "Implied Market Price of Weather Risk" by Wolfgang Härdle and Brenda López Cabrera, January 2009.
002 "On the Systemic Nature of Weather Risk" by Guenther Filler, Martin Odening, Ostap Okhrin and Wei Xu, January 2009.
003 "Localized Realized Volatility Modelling" by Ying Chen, Wolfgang Karl Härdle and Uta Pigorsch, January 2009.
004 "New recipes for estimating default intensities" by Alexander Baranovski, Carsten von Lieres and André Wilch, January 2009.
005 "Panel Cointegration Testing in the Presence of a Time Trend" by Bernd Droge and Deniz Dilan Karaman Örsal, January 2009.
006 "Regulatory Risk under Optimal Incentive Regulation" by Roland Strausz, January 2009.
007 "Combination of multivariate volatility forecasts" by Alessandra Amendola and Giuseppe Storti, January 2009.
008 "Mortality modeling: Lee-Carter and the macroeconomy" by Katja Hanewald, January 2009.
009 "Stochastic Population Forecast for Germany and its Consequence for the German Pension System" by Wolfgang Härdle and Alena Mysickova, February 2009.
010 "A Microeconomic Explanation of the EPK Paradox" by Wolfgang Härdle, Volker Krätschmer and Rouslan Moro, February 2009.
011 "Defending Against Speculative Attacks" by Tijmen Daniëls, Henk Jager and Franc Klaassen, February 2009.
012 "On the Existence of the Moments of the Asymptotic Trace Statistic" by Deniz Dilan Karaman Örsal and Bernd Droge, February 2009.
013 "CDO Pricing with Copulae" by Barbara Choros, Wolfgang Härdle and Ostap Okhrin, March 2009.
014 "Properties of Hierarchical Archimedean Copulas" by Ostap Okhrin, Yarema Okhrin and Wolfgang Schmid, March 2009.
015 "Stochastic Mortality, Macroeconomic Risks, and Life Insurer Solvency" by Katja Hanewald, Thomas Post and Helmut Gründl, March 2009.
016 "Men, Women, and the Ballot Woman Suffrage in the United States" by Sebastian Braun and Michael Kvasnicka, March 2009.
017 "The Importance of Two-Sided Heterogeneity for the Cyclicality of Labour Market Dynamics" by Ronald Bachmann and Peggy David, March 2009.
018 "Transparency through Financial Claims with Fingerprints ­ A Free Market Mechanism for Preventing Mortgage Securitization Induced Financial Crises" by Helmut Gründl and Thomas Post, March 2009.
019 "A Joint Analysis of the KOSPI 200 Option and ODAX Option Markets Dynamics" by Ji Cao, Wolfgang Härdle and Julius Mungo, March 2009.
020 "Putting Up a Good Fight: The Galí-Monacelli Model versus `The Six Major Puzzles in International Macroeconomics'", by Stefan Ried, April 2009.
021 "Spectral estimation of the fractional order of a Lévy process" by Denis Belomestny, April 2009.
022 "Individual Welfare Gains from Deferred Life-Annuities under Stochastic Lee-Carter Mortality" by Thomas Post, April 2009.
SFB 649, Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

SFB 649 Discussion Paper Series 2009
For a complete list of Discussion Papers published by the SFB 649, please visit http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de.
023 "Pricing Bermudan options using regression: optimal rates of convergence for lower estimates" by Denis Belomestny, April 2009.
024 "Incorporating the Dynamics of Leverage into Default Prediction" by Gunter Löffler and Alina Maurer, April 2009.
025 "Measuring the effects of geographical distance on stock market correlation" by Stefanie Eckel, Gunter Löffler, Alina Maurer and Volker Schmidt, April 2009.
026 "Regression methods for stochastic control problems and their convergence analysis" by Denis Belomestny, Anastasia Kolodko and John Schoenmakers, May 2009.
027 "Unionisation Structures, Productivity, and Firm Performance" by Sebastian Braun, May 2009.
028 "Optimal Smoothing for a Computationally and Statistically Efficient Single Index Estimator" by Yingcun Xia, Wolfgang Härdle and Oliver Linton, May 2009.
029 "Controllability and Persistence of Money Market Rates along the Yield Curve: Evidence from the Euro Area" by Ulrike Busch and Dieter Nautz, May 2009.
030 "Non-constant Hazard Function and Inflation Dynamics" by Fang Yao, May 2009.
031 "De copulis non est disputandum - Copulae: An Overview" by Wolfgang Härdle and Ostap Okhrin, May 2009.
032 "Weather-based estimation of wildfire risk" by Joanne Ho and Martin Odening, June 2009.
033 "TFP Growth in Old and New Europe" by Michael C. Burda and Battista Severgnini, June 2009.
034 "How does entry regulation influence entry into self-employment and occupational mobility?" by Susanne Prantl and Alexandra Spitz-Oener, June 2009.
035 "Trade-Off Between Consumption Growth and Inequality: Theory and Evidence for Germany" by Runli Xie, June 2009.
036 "Inflation and Growth: New Evidence From a Dynamic Panel Threshold Analysis" by Stephanie Kremer, Alexander Bick and Dieter Nautz, July 2009.
037 "The Impact of the European Monetary Union on Inflation Persistence in the Euro Area" by Barbara Meller and Dieter Nautz, July 2009.
038 "CDO and HAC" by Barbara Choro, Wolfgang Härdle and Ostap Okhrin, July 2009.
039 "Regulation and Investment in Network Industries: Evidence from European Telecoms" by Michal Grajek and Lars-Hendrik Röller, July 2009.
040 "The Political Economy of Regulatory Risk" by Roland Strausz, August 2009.
041 "Shape invariant modelling pricing kernels and risk aversion" by Maria Grith, Wolfgang Härdle and Juhyun Park, August 2009.
042 "The Cost of Tractability and the Calvo Pricing Assumption" by Fang Yao, September 2009.
SFB 649, Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

SFB 649 Discussion Paper Series 2009
For a complete list of Discussion Papers published by the SFB 649, please visit http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de.
043 "Evidence on Unemployment, Market Work and Household Production" by Michael C. Burda and Daniel S. Hamermesh, September 2009.
044 "Modelling and Forecasting Liquidity Supply Using Semiparametric Factor Dynamics" by Wolfgang Karl Härdle, Nikolaus Hautsch and Andrija Mihoci, September 2009.
045 "Quantifizierbarkeit von Risiken auf Finanzmärkten" by Wolfgang Karl Härdle and Christian Wolfgang Friedrich Kirchner, October 2009.
046 "Pricing of Asian temperature risk" by Fred Benth, Wolfgang Karl Härdle and Brenda López Cabrera, October 2009.
047 "MM-Stat ­ MultiMedia-Statistik: Statistische Datenanalyse ­ webbasiert, interaktiv und multimedial" by Sigbert Klinke, Dina Kuhlee, Christian Theel, Cornelia Wagner and Christian Westermeier, October 2009.
048 "Migration of the Highly Skilled: Can Europe catch up with the US?" by Lydia Mechtenberg and Roland Strausz, October 2009.
049 "A blocking and regularization approach to high dimensional realized covariance estimation" by Nikolaus Hautsch, Lada M. Kyj and Roel C.A. Oomen, October 2009.
050 "Generalized single-index models: The EFM approach" by Xia Cui, Wolfgang Karl Härdle and Lixing Zhu, October 2009.
051 "The Market Impact of a Limit Order" by Nikolaus Hautsch and Ruihong Huang, October 2009.
052 "On economic evaluation of directional forecasts" by Oliver Blaskowitz and Helmut Herwartz, October 2009.
053 "Monetary Policy Implementation and Overnight Rate Persistence" by Dieter Nautz and Jan Scheithauer, November 2009.
054 "Depression Econometrics: A FAVAR Model of Monetary Policy During the Great Depression" by Pooyan Amir Ahmadi and Albrecht Ritschl, November 2009.
SFB 649, Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

