BERLIN

SFB 6 4 9 E C O N O M I C R I S K

SFB 649 Discussion Paper 2011-046
The Regulation of Interdependent Markets
Raffaele Fiocco* Carlo Scarpa**
* Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany **University of Brescia, Italy
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".
http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de ISSN 1860-5664
SFB 649, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin

The Regulation of Interdependent Markets
Ra¤aele Fioccoy and Carlo Scarpaz
Abstract
We examine the issue of whether two monopolists which produce substitutable goods should be regulated by one (centralization) or two (decentralization) regulatory authorities, when the regulator(s) can be partially captured by industry. Under full information, two decentralized agencies - each regulating a single market - charge lower prices than a unique regulator, making consumers better o¤. However, this leads to excessive costs for the taxpayers who subsidize the ...rms, so that centralized regulation is preferable. Under asymmetric information about the ...rms'costs, lobbying induces a unique regulator to be more concerned with the industry's interests, and this decreases social welfare. When the substitutability between the goods is high enough, the ...rms'lobbying activity may be so strong that decentralizing the regulatory structure may be social welfare enhancing.
Keywords: regulation, lobbying, asymmetric information, energy markets.
JEL classi...cation: D82, L51.
We are particularly indebted to Alessandro Petretto and Bruce Lyons who read the ...rst draft of this paper and made helpful comments. We also owe special thanks to Carlo Cambini, Alberto Iozzi and Roland Strausz for their insightful suggestions. Finally, we thank the participants in the following conferences: DIME Workshop at the University of Naples Parthenope, the 10th Centre for Competition and Regulatory Policy Workshop at the City University London and the 37th EARIE Conference in Istanbul. The ...nancial support from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft via SFB 649 "Ökonomisches Risiko" is gratefully acknowledged.
yInstitute for Microeconomic Theory, Humboldt Universität zu Berlin. zDepartment of Economics, University of Brescia, and Fondazione ENI Enrico Mattei, Milan.
1

1. Introduction
Should a country set up an energy regulator or rather have separate agencies for gas and electricity? And should we have a single transport authority, or rather a railways regulator separate from those regulating motorways or airports? Our paper provides an attempt to explore these issues, focusing our attention on the regulatory structure and on how to design the jurisdiction of a regulatory authority when there are two di¤erent but related markets.
Several theoretical contributions to the literature on regulation have investigated the pattern of government intervention in a single product market, whose features hinder unfettered competition between ...rms. Those studies which have actually considered the regulation of multiproduct industries have been mostly concerned with the problem of determining which ...rms will supply which products.1 Our focus is thus not on the number of ...rms, but on the number of regulators.
We assume that a benevolent political principal (the Congress) can delegate the regulation of two interdependent markets either to a unique regulator (a regime de...ned as centralization) or to two di¤erent authorities (decentralization). Regulation may be non-benevolent since it can be captured by the ...rms' lobbying activities. Our model predicts that under complete information, where lobbying is not pro...table, regulatory centralization is the best option for the Congress. As long as regulation is benevolent, market interdependence implies that the centralized (cooperative) regime allows one to internalize all the relevant e¤ects and thus improves social welfare. This intuitive result covers a distributional issue of some interest: decentralizing the regulation yields higher quantities than under centralization, making consumers better o¤. However, this leads to excessive costs for the taxpayers, who subsidize the ...rms, and this is detrimental to social welfare.
If ...rms have private information about their costs, there is scope for lobbying and we ...nd that a unique regulator is more distorted to the industry's interests as a result of the competition between ...rms at the lobbying stage. A trade-o¤ emerges in equilibrium between the market interdependence effect and the lobbying e¤ect. When the substitutability between goods is high enough, the latter e¤ect may outweigh the former, so that decentralizing the regulatory structure can increase social welfare. The decentralized (noncooperative) regime turns out to be a good structural response to non-benevolent regulation since it alleviates the capture problem.
The design of the regulatory jurisdiction in interdependent markets is an
1See, among others, Gilbert and Riordan [9] for an analysis of the advantages and disadvantages of bundled and unbundled supply in multiproduct industries.
2

issue which, despite its theoretical and empirical importance, has been only touched by the literature on optimal regulation, so that several gaps remain.2
The issue of the separation of powers has indeed been addressed in the theory of regulation. Among others, La¤ont and Martimort [12] consider the problem of monitoring a regulated ...rm which has private information about some pieces of its activity. The authors argue that when regulation makes collusive o¤ers that are accepted by the ...rm whatever its characteristics, splitting regulatory rights on some aspects of the ...rm's performance between di¤erent agencies may act as a device against the threat of regulatory capture. Separation turns out to be desirable since it reduces regulatory discretion in engaging in socially wasteful activities. In our setting, we show that decentralized regulation can mitigate the adverse e¤ect of lobbying in a context of interdependent markets since the noncooperative regulatory behavior removes the competition between ...rms at the lobbying stage.3
Another stream of literature which is relevant for our work is the multiprincipal incentive theory. Baron [2] examines the regulation of a nonlocalized externality by two di¤erent agencies and compares the noncooperative equilibrium with the case in which the two regulators are allowed to coordinate their activities. Contrary to our paper, regulatory agencies represent conicting interests since they have di¤erent mandates. Moreover, lobbying by industry is not an issue. In a reduced-form model with two agencies which exhibit di¤erent objectives in presence of regulatory capture, Martimort [15] shows that the duplication of non-benevolent regulators may improve social welfare. This shares some similarities with our analysis, even though our results are driven by market interdependence by endogenizing the lobbying stage.
Our model is ...nally related to the well-known capture theory of economic regulation, whose seminal contribution traces back to Stigler [20]. Following his paradigm, we assume that the industry is able to mobilize regulatory
2For a recent survey, see Armstrong and Sappington [1]. 3A relevant stream of literature analyzes the trade-o¤ between centralization and decentralization in economic organizations (see Poitevin [18] for a review on this topic). La¤ont and Martimort [11] show that under certain conditions a decentralized structure can alleviate the problem of collusion if there are limits on communication between the principal and the agents. With this literature we share the assumption that the delegation process is imperfect, so that regulators may have private agendas. However, their results are driven by very di¤erent forces from those operating in our setting: decentralization (that they call "delegation") implies an extention of the organizational hierarchy, which can be pro...table when the principal cannot communicate with the bottom-level agent. In our model, decentralization means separation of the regulatory jurisdiction between two noncooperative agencies and its superiority in terms of social welfare is a consequence of the way the interdependence between markets a¤ects the lobbying stage.
3

powers to obtain favours, since it has greater incentives than dispersed consumers and taxpayers with a low per-capita stake to get organized in order to exercise political inuence.4 Obviously, regulated ...rms must incur some costs when lobbying the agency (La¤ont and Tirole [13]). Following Martimort [15], we assume that the capture can only be partial, and that it materializes in a higher weight which the regulator puts on pro...ts in her objective function.5
The plan of the paper is as follows. Section 2 presents the basic structures of the model. In Section 3 we compute the full information pricing policies and we study their impact on the welfare of the agents involved. In Section 4 we derive the regulatory outcome under both regimes in the case of asymmetric cost information and make the welfare comparisons. Finally, Section 5 is devoted to some concluding remarks.

2. The basic model

We consider two symmetric markets for substitutable goods. Following Singh and Vives [19], the consumers'gross utility from the marketplace is represented by a quadratic utility function of the form

U (q1; q2) = q1 + q2

1 2

q12 + 2 q1q2 + q22 ,

(1)

where qi denotes the quantity for good i = 1; 2 and , are positive parameters; 2 [0; ) expresses the degree of substitutability between goods.6

The consumer surplus net of expenditures on goods is given by

CS (q1; q2) = U (q1; q2) p1q1 p2q2. The inverse demand function pi (qi; qj) for good i is thus7

(2)

4It is anyway worth quoting the contribution of Miller III et al. [16] who informally

argue that centralization should alter the relative rates of return to lobbying for various

coalitions, generally in favour of groups having di¤use interests which can focus their

lobbying against rent-creating regulation on one location rather than splitting those e¤orts

among a variety of regulatory agencies.

5Addressing a di¤erent issue, Calzolari and Scarpa [7] also suggest that the ...rm can

induce the regulator to be biased towards pro...ts.

6All these assumptions ensure that U (:) is strictly concave and guarantee the positivity

of direct demand functions q1 (:) and q2 (:) not derived here. 7Vives [22, ch. 6] shows analytically that, under some basic conditions, if two goods are

gross

substitutes,

which

means

@ Di (p) @pj

0, i 6= j, where Di (p) = qi is the direct demand

for

good

i

and

p

is

the

price

vector,

then

we

have

@ Pi (q) @qj

0, i 6= j, where Pi (q) = pi is

the inverse demand for good i and q is the quantity vector.

4

pi (qi; qj) =

qi qj.

The markets are run by monopolies. The pro...t of ...rm i is

(3)

i (qi; qj; Si) = pi (qi; qj) qi + Si Ci (qi) ,

(4)

where Si is the subsidy which may accrue to ...rm i via the regulatory process (see below). The total cost of ...rm i is

Ci (qi) = ciqi + fi,

(5)

where ci 2 (0; ) is the marginal cost of ...rm i and fi > 0 is ...rm i's ...xed cost of production. We will later concentrate on symmetric equilibria (where c1 = c2 = c and f1 = f2 = f ).
In line with the literature, the Congress is a benevolent maximizer of a social welfare function, which is given by

W (q1; S1; q2; S2) = CS (q1; q2) S1 S2.

(6)

This means that the Congress cares about consumer surplus net of the subsidization of ...rms ...nanced by taxpayers via the regulatory process.8
Regulator(s) can be partially captured by industries. Following Marti-
mort [15], the result of such a partial capture is that the regulatory activity
is distorted to industry's interests. The regulatory objective function is then
the sum of social welfare W in (6) and (a share of) the pro...ts i in (4). A decentralized regulator for market i only cares about the pro...t of ...rm
i, to which she attaches a weight equal to 'iD 2 [0; 1],9 while centralized regulation gives a weight 'iC to the pro...ts of each ...rm. Formally, a decentralized regulator for market i maximizes

ViD (qi; Si; :) = CS (qi; qj) Si Sj + 'Di i

(7)

8Baron [3] shows that if there is a strong electoral connection between the bene...ts delivered to constituents and their electoral support, the legislature will choose a regulatory mandate that favors consumer over producer interests and results in regulation that does not maximize expected total surplus. The Congress' objective can be also thought as a response to the regulatory capture. In our setting of imperfect delegation, the Congress does not have time, resources and expertise to discover the lobbying activity exerted by the ...rms and it cannot give the regulator the right monetary incentives to completely internalize its objectives. Neven and Röller [17] suggest that when competition authority's o¢ cials are exposed to the lobbying of ...rms that can o¤er them personal rewards a consumer welfare standard might counterbalance the bias resulting from such lobbying.
9In other words, it would be too costly for one ...rm to lobby the regulator in the other market.

5

and the objective of a unique regulator is

V C (q1; S1; q2; S2) = CS (q1; q2) S1 S2 + '1C 1 + 'C2 2.

(8)

The regulatory instruments are the quantity and the subsidy to the ...rm in each market. Even though in some sectors price regulation seems to be more natural, in relevant industries like electricity, gas and transport, which are characterized by network assets with limited capacity, the choice of scale plays a crucial role as it yields transmission constraints. A common way in the literature to model this feature is to consider the quantity as a choice variable since the entire capacity is dumped on the market.10 Notice that this formulation implies a sort of quantity competition between regulators under decentralization. This is in line with empirical works of some relevance, which corroborate the idea that binding infrastructure capacity restrictions induce Cournot behavior.11
It is worth stressing that the choice of the objective function is not central to our analysis and the results we obtain. Nothing substantial would change in our results, if we assumed that the Congress were to set an objective function with a positive weight on pro...ts, and ...rms lobby to increase that weight in the regulatory objective function(s). In the same way, the regulatory problems would not be a¤ected, if we assumed that each regulator only cares about the subsidization of her regulated ...rm.12
The weights 'Di and 'iC are driven by the ...rms' lobbying activities. These weights depend on the amount of expenditure incurred to inuence the agency, which is ...nanced through pro...ts that the ...rm receives in equilibrium. In other terms, the regulator's concern 'ki in regime k (k = C; D) with the rent of ...rm i is the outcome of the following maximization problem

max
'ki 2[0;1]

k i

'ki ; 'kj

'ik ,

(9)

where (:) 0 (with (0) = 0) is the cost (identical for both ...rms) of lobbying activity, which is increasing and convex in 'ki ( 0 > 0, 00 > 0). This setting captures the idea originated by Stigler [20] that interest groups
choose to inuence the government at a level where their marginal bene...t
equals their marginal cost.

10 See on this topic Tirole [21, ch. 5]. 11See Egging and Gabriel [8] and Holz et al. [10] for empirical evidence about the
European natural gas market. Bushnell et al. [6] focus on the U.S. electicity sector. 12The subsidy of the other ...rm represents an exogenous variable in the regulator's
optimization program, which disappears in the ...rst-order condition.

6

3. The full information benchmark
In each market the regulatory agency has two instruments, i.e. quantity qi and subsidy Si to ...rm i. Under complete information the timing of the regulatory game is the following.
(I) The Congress decides to delegate regulation of two interdependent markets either to a unique agency or two di¤erent authorities.
(II) Firms engage in a lobbying activity to induce the regulator(s) to internalize (at least in part) their pro...ts in the objective function.
(III) Under decentralization the regulator for market i independently makes a take-it-or-leave-it o¤er of a regulatory mechanism MiD = qiD; SiD to ...rm i. Under centralization the unique agency simultaneously o¤ers a regulatory policy MiC = qiC; SiC to each ...rm.
(IV) Each ...rm can either accept or reject the o¤er. If it refuses the proposed policy, the ...rm does not produce and earns zero pro...ts.
(V) If the ...rm accepts, the contract is executed and the regulatory policy is implemented.
Our regulatory model is a two-stage game. At the ...rst stage, the ...rms' lobbying activity determines the weight of pro...ts in the regulatory objective function(s). At the second stage, each regulator chooses the policy which maximizes her objective function. We solve this game by backward induction. The two alternatives we consider di¤er in the number of markets (or ...rms) the regulator is responsible for and (possibly) the value assigned to pro...ts. Let us analyze them in sequence.

3.1. Prices under decentralization

Let us ...rst consider the regulatory setting in which two di¤erent agencies
coexist. We label this environment as decentralization.
At the ...nal stage, the regulator in charge of market i sets the quantity
qi and the subsidy Si, in order to maximize the consumer surplus CS net of subsidies (S1 + S2) plus the pro...ts of ...rm i weighted by a given parameter 'iD 2 [0; 1] determined at the previous stage, which represents the value the regulator assigns to each dollar of ...rm i's rent. Substituting (2) and (4) into
(7), the objective of the regulator for market i is the following

max qi + qj
qi;Si

1 2

qi2 + 2 qiqj + qj2

pi (qi; qj) qi

pj (qi; qj) qj Si Sj + 'Di i

(10)

7

s:t: i 0,

(PCi)

where the participation constraint (PCi) states that ...rm i is willing to produce only if it receives from the regulatory mechanism at least its reservation pro...t (normalized to zero). Referring to Appendix A for the details, from the ...rst-order condition for qi the regulated quantity for good i is given by

qiD qD =

c .

(11)

Replacing (11) into (3) yields the full information pricing policy. This result is emphasized in the following Lemma.

Lemma 1 Under complete information, decentralized regulation yields a price

for good i equal to

pDi pD = c z ( c) ,

(12)

where z 2 [0; 1).

Notice from (12) that as markets are independent (z = 0) we ...nd the standard marginal cost pricing. As c 2 (0; ), the substitutability between the goods (z > 0) reduces equilibrium prices below marginal costs.
At the ...rst stage, each ...rm engages in a lobbying activity, which determines the weight the regulator is willing to attach to pro...ts. As speci...ed above, we assume that this weight depends on the amount of expenditure incurred to inuence the agency. In other words, in line with (9) the regulator's concern 'iD with the rent of ...rm i is the outcome of the following maximization problem

max
'iD 2[0;1]

D i

'Di ; 'jD

'Di .

(13)

Since 'Di 2 [0; 1] and then there is no reason to leave the ...rm any rents,

i.e.

D i

=

0,

it

is

immediate

to

see

that

'D1

=

'D2

'D = 0 in equilibrium. In

other words, no ...rm has incentives to lobby the regulator, since it anticipates

that it will get zero pro...ts anyway.

3.2. The case of centralization
The alternative regulatory environment we consider is one where a single agency is given the responsibility for both markets. We label this environment as centralization.

8

At the second stage, this regulator determines the quantities q1 and q2 and subsidies S1 and S2 in order to maximize the regulator's objective function. Replacing (2) and (4) into (8), the regulator's program is the following

max q1 + q2
q1;q2;S1;S2

1 2

q12 + 2 q1q2 + q22

p1 (q1; q2) q1 p2 (q1; q2) q2 S1 S2 + '1C 1 + 'C2 2

(14)

s:t: (P C1), (P C2).
Appendix B shows the solution to the problem in (14). From the ...rstorder condition for qi the regulated quantity for good i is given by

qiC

qC =

c.

(1 + z)

(15)

We can see from (15) that substitutability reduces the equilibrium output.

A unique regulator ...nds it optimal to curb production of substitutes, since

consumers can move from one market to the other.

Let us now derive the complete-information pricing policy under regula-

tory centralization. This is shown in the following Lemma.

Lemma 2 Under complete information, centralized regulation yields a price

for good i equal to

pCi pC = c:

(16)

Observe from (16) that the price set by a single regulator equals marginal
costs, independently of substitutability between goods.
As under decentralization, at the ...rst stage lobbying occurs which yields
the weight given to pro...ts in the regulatory objective function. Hence, the regulatory concern 'iC with pro...ts of ...rm i is the outcome of the following maximization problem

max
'iC 2[0;1]

C i

'Ci ; 'jC

'Ci .

(17)

Since

D i

=

0,

even

under

centralization

lobbying

activity

is

not

pro...table

in case of complete information and then '1C = '2C 'C = 0.

From the analysis above we can conclude that

' = 'D 'C = 0,

(18)

so that in both regimes lobbying does not emerge in equilibrium. This con...rms the well-known idea that in absence of asymmetric information, regulated ...rms are unable to extract rents and therefore have no incentives to inuence regulatory outcomes.

9

3.3. Welfare comparisons
Let us now compare the welfare of each agent a¤ected by the regulatory outcome under the two regimes. We start comparing price levels, which turn out to be crucial for the analysis of our main results. Taking the di¤erence between prices in (12) and (16) immediately yields

where

pD pC p = z ( c) = I (z) ,

(19)

I (z) z ( c) 0

(20)

as c 2 (0; ). Notice that (19) is negative as long as goods are substitutes. We know from (16) that prices under centralization are not a¤ected by substitutability. On the contrary, (12) shows that with market interdependence - as consumers can switch from one good to the other - the noncooperative behavior of regulators pushes prices below marginal costs. Hence, a "market interdependence e¤ect", denoted by I (z), occurs under full information and yields a downward price distortion under decentralization that de...nitely bene...ts consumers.
We can show now our ...rst relevant results, which will be proved and commented upon in di¤erent steps.

Proposition 3 Assume that z 2 (0; 1), i.e. goods are substitutes. Then,
under complete information, regulatory decentralization (i) increases consumer surplus, i.e. CSD > CSC (ii) increases subsidies, i.e. SD > SC (iii) decreases social welfare, i.e. W D < W C.

Starting from point (i) in Proposition 3, we plug (11) and (15) into (2) in order to ...nd the di¤erence in consumer surplus between the two regulatory regimes, which after some manipulations can be written as

CSD CSC

2+z

CS = z

(

(1 + z)

c)2 .

(21)

Substitutability between goods implies that expression (21) is strictly positive (CSD > CSC), so decentralization makes consumers better o¤. This is a straightforward consequence of lower prices under this regime, as is evident from (19).
Coming to subsidies, notice that regulated prices are lower under decentralization, but equilibrium pro...ts are zero in all cases. This can work

10

because of subsidies which are bound to be lower under centralized regulation. To be more precise, let us now compute the amount of subsidies the ...rms receive (to show point (ii) in Proposition 3). Substituting (11) and (15) into (4), we obtain after some computations the di¤erence in subsidies granted to each ...rm between the two regulatory regimes, which is given by

SD SC

z S= (

c)2 .

(22)

Not surprisingly, (22) shows that the higher production under decentralization requires a greater subsidization (SD > SC) which reduces taxpayer welfare.
As from (6) the Congress cares about the consumer surplus net of subsidies ...nanced by taxpayers, using (21) and (22) the di¤erence in social welfare between the two regimes can be written after some computations as

WD WC

W=

z2 (
(1 + z)

c)2 .

(23)

Notice from (23) that, as we have emphasized in point (iii) of Proposition 3, substitutability between goods yields higher social welfare under centralization (W D < W C). The excess subsidy given under decentralization entails a welfare loss which more than compensates the higher consumer surplus.
In a sense, this is the result one would have expected. Under complete information, nothing interferes with the regulator's ability to maximize her objective function which, as long as ' 2 [0; 1], entails that pro...ts are zero independently of the weight each regulator gives to the private ...rm's profits (see Baron and Myerson [5]). Therefore, lobbying is not pro...table, and having one powerful regulator, in charge of both markets, yields a better outcome. However, what we consider striking is that the (predictable) aggregate result conceals a relevant distributional issue: consumers would be better o¤ with two independent regulators, but this would happen at an excessively large cost for taxpayers.

4. Prices under asymmetric information

Let us now assume that each ...rm has private information about its marginal

cost ci. The regulator has only imperfect prior knowledge about ci, repre-

sented by a density function f (ci), which is assumed to be continuous and

positive on the domain [c function is given by F (ci)

=; c+Rc]c.i

The f (eci)

corresponding dcei 2 [0; 1].

cumulative

distribution

11

Under asymmetric information the timing of the regulatory game is the
following.
(I) Nature draws an independently and identically distributed type ci for ...rm i, according to the density function f (ci).
(II) Firms engage in a lobbying activity to induce the regulator(s) to
internalize (at least in part) their pro...ts in the objective function.
(III) Each ...rm learns its type.
(IV) Under decentralization, each regulator independently o¤ers a direct incentive compatible mechanism MiD = qiD (bci) ; SiD (bci) where the output qi (:) and the subsidy Si (:) targeted to ...rm i are contingent on its own report bci 2 [c ; c+]. Each ...rm is induced to reveal honestly its private information, so that in equilibrium we have bci = ci.13 Under centralization, a unique regulator can make the regulatory policy contingent on the declarations of both ...rms, so she simultaneously o¤ers MiC = qiC (bci; bcj) ; SiC (bci; bcj) .
(V) Each ...rm can either accept or reject the o¤er. If it refuses the
proposed policy, the ...rm does not produce and earns zero pro...ts.
(VI) If the ...rm accepts, the contract is executed and the regulatory policy
is implemented.
As shown in Appendix C, a local necessary condition for incentive com-
patibility, which is also globally su¢ cient if qi (:) is non-increasing in ci, is given by the following expression

Zc+

Zc+ i (ci; :) f (cj) dcj =

i

c+; :

f

(cj )

dcj

+

Zc+Zc+ @

Ci

(eci

;

@eci

:) decif

(cj )

dcj .

cc

c ci

(ICCi)

This condition states that the expected pro...t of ...rm i must be equal to

the expected pro...t of the most ine¢ cient ...rm plus an expected informational

rent (captured by the double integral) which represents the reward to the ...rm

for revealing truthfully its private information. Notice that, as markets are

interdependent, when signing the contract each ...rm can only predict the

expected value of its pro...t, which depends on the costs of the other ...rm.

13The revelation principle ensures that, without any loss of generality, the regulator may be restricted to direct incentive compatible policies, which require the ...rm to report its cost parameter and which give the ...rm no incentive to lie. For an application of the revelation principle to regulation, see the seminal paper of Baron and Myerson [5].

12

4.1. Prices with decentralization
A decentralized regulator maximizes (7) in expected terms since she designs the policy mechanism before knowing the ...rm's cost. Using (2) and (4), at the second stage the maximization problem is the following

Zc+Zc+

max
qi(ci);Si(ci)

qi (ci) + qj (cj)

1 2

qi2 (ci) + 2 qi (ci) qj (cj) + qj2 (cj)

cc

pi (qi (ci) ; qj (cj)) qi (ci) pj (qi (ci) ; qj (cj)) qj (cj)

Si (ci)

Sj + 'Di i f (ci) f (cj) dcidcj, Zc+
i (ci; :) f (cj) dcj 0

s:t:

c

(24) (PCi)

Zc+ Zc+ Zc+Zc+ i (ci; :) f (cj) dcj = i c+; : f (cj) dcj + qi (eci) decif (cj) dcj, (ICCi)
c c c ci
where the incentive compatibility constraint (ICCi) of ...rm i is derived for the cost speci...cation in (5). Appendix D shows the solution to the problem in (24).
From the ...rst-order condition for qi (:) the quantity produced by ...rm i as a function of 'iD is given by

qiD 'Di = 1

ci 1 'iD Hi ,

(25)

where Hi

F (ci) f (ci)

0 is the hazard rate.14

For the sake of convenience, we focus our attention on the symmetric

case,15 i.e. c1 = c2 = c. Replacing (25) into (3) yields the asymmetric information prices as functions of the pro...t weights, which are shown in the

following Lemma.

14 The hazard rate Hi is supposed to be increasing in ci. This monotonicity property, which is met by the most usual distributions, may be interpreted as a decrease in the conditional probability that there are further cost reductions, given that there has already been a cost marginal reduction, as the ...rm becomes more e¢ cient. See La¤ont and Tirole [14, ch. 1] for a description of this "decreasing return" assumption.
15Notice however from Appendix D that the two cost parameters are independently drawn from the distribution of costs.

13

Lemma 4 Under asymmetric cost information, decentralized regulation yields a price for good i equal to

piD 'Di ; 'jD = c z ( c) + H 1 'Di + z 1 'jD

= pD + H 1 'iD + z 1 'jD , where pD is de...ned by (12).

(26)

The impact of substitutability on prices is now twofold. On the one hand, as under full information, higher substitutability yields a reduction in prices. On the other, the distortion above the complete-information price, captured by the expression in square brackets, is exacerbated by the substitutability between goods. To see which e¤ect prevails, notice from (26) that

@piD = @z

c 1 'jD H < 0,

as qDj > 0 (see (25) inverting i and j). As under complete information, even though at a lesser extent, given 'jD a stronger substitutability between goods reduces prices in equilibrium.
Finally, notice that an increase in the weight 'Dj given to the pro...ts of the ...rm j yields a reduction in the equilibrium price pDi as long as goods are substitutes. Indeed, a higher quantity produced in market j when the

regulator is more pro...t distorted decreases the price for the substitutable

good i (see (3)).

4.2. Pricing policy under centralization

Substituting (2) and (4) into (8) evaluated in expected terms, the maximization program of a unique regulator under asymmetric information is the following

Zc+Zc+

max
q1(c1;c2);q2(c1;c2);S1(c1;c2);S2(c1;c2)

[ q1 (c1; c2) + q2 (c1; c2)

cc

1 2

q12 (c1; c2) + 2 q1 (c1; c2) q2 (c1; c2) + q22 (c1; c2)

p1 (q1 (c1; c2) ; q2 (c1; c2)) q1 (c1; c2) p2 (q1 (c1; c2) ; q2 (c1; c2)) q2 (c1; c2)]

14

S1 (c1; c2) S2 (c1; c2) + 'C1 1 + '2C 2 f (c1) f (c2) dc1dc2

(27)

s:t: (P C1), (P C2), (ICC1), (ICC2).
Notice that with independently and identically distributed cost draws the incentive compatibility constraints under centralization are a straightforward extension of those derived in Appendix C for the case of decentralization. The only di¤erence is that now the quantity is contingent on the declaration of both ...rms. Appendix E shows the solution to the problem in (27).
From the ...rst-order condition for qi (:), restricting our attention on the symmetric case (c1 = c2 = c) the regulated quantity for good i as a function of 'Ci and 'jC can be written after some manipulations as

qiC 'Ci ; 'jC =

1 (1 + z)

c

1

'Ci

H

+ z 'iC (1

'jC z2)

H

.

(28)

Notice from (28) that

@q

C i

@'Cj

=

z (1 z2) H 0.

(29)

Centralized regulation brings about a sort of competition between the

...rms, which has implication for their lobbying activities. A higher weight obtained by ...rm j on its pro...ts harms ...rm i, which is allowed to produce (and earn) less, as the goods are substitutes.
We are now in a position to derive the asymmetric information prices as

a function of pro...t weights. This is done in the following Lemma.

Lemma 5 Under asymmetric cost information, centralized regulation yields a price for good i equal to

pCi 'Ci = c + 1 'iC H.

(30)

Notice from (30) that the price charged by a single regulator is distorted above marginal costs due to asymmetric information, independently of the substitutability between goods. Hence, in both regulatory structures asymmetric information increases prices. However, under centralization the regulated price is above marginal cost, while this is not necessarily the case under decentralization (see (26)).

15

4.3. Equilibrium lobbying activities
Now that we have derived the equilibrium prices/quantities in the regulation stage (as functions of the pro...t weights 'ki , with k = C; D), we can proceed backwards to determine the equilibrium levels of lobbying activities, using (9). To this end, we need to calculate the expected pro...ts on the basis of equilibrium quantities, as lobbying is assumed to take place before ...rms learn their private information.
In case of decentralization, after substituting the equilibrium pro...t from (ICCi), as determined by (25), into (9) we can derive the weight given by each agency to the pro...ts of ...rm i as the solution to

Zc+Zc+Zc+ 1
max
'iD 2[0;1] cc c

ec 1 'Di H (ec) decf (ci) f (cj) dcidcj

'Di .

(31)

The (interior) equilibrium value for 'Di must satisfy the following ...rst-

order condition

Zc+Zc+Zc+

0 'iD = 1

H (ec) decf (ci) f (cj) dcidcj,

cc c

which states that the equilibrium weight is such that the marginal cost of lobbying equates the (expected) marginal pro...t. This implies

! 'iD 'D = ( 0) 1 He ,

(32)

where He

R c+
c

R c+
c

R c+
c

H

(ec)

decf

(ci)

f

(cj )

dci dcj .

Notice from (32) that the

two ...rms obtain the same weight on their pro...ts, i.e. 'Di 'D, i = 1; 2.

Turning to the case of centralization, we can proceed in an analogous way

using (28) and (9). The weight given to pro...ts by a unique regulator arises

from the following maximization

Zc+Zc+Zc+

max
'iC 2[0;1]

1 (1 + z)

ec 1 'Ci

cc c

#

+z 'iC 1

'jC H (ec) z

decf (ci) f (cj) dcidcj

H (ec) 'Ci .

(33)

16

The (interior) equilibrium value for 'iC must satisfy the following ...rstorder condition

0 'iC which implies

Zc+Zc+Zc+

1 = (1 z2)

H (ec) decf (ci) f (cj) dcidcj,

cc c

'Ci 'C = ( 0) 1

! He (1 z2) .

(34)

The two ...rms will get the same weight on their pro...ts in equilibrium, i.e. 'Ci 'C, i = 1; 2.
An important consequence of this analysis, which can be simply obtained
by comparing (32) and (34), is the following.

Proposition 6 In an interior equilibrium, ' (z) 'D 'C (z) : [0; 1) !

( 1; 0), i.e. the weight of pro...ts in the regulatory objective function is higher

under centralization. Moreover, ' (z) is

(a) (strictly) decreasing, i.e.

@

'(z) @z

<

0

for

z

2

(0; 1)

(b) (strictly) concave, i.e.

@2 '(z) @z2

< 0.

The proof is quite straightforward. Proposition 6 stresses that a single regulator is more distorted to ...rms'interests than two noncooperative agencies. As already pointed out, centralization introduces an implicit element of competition between the ...rms in the political market. Each ...rm is actually engaged in a sort of competition when lobbying the regulator because a higher weight on its pro...ts implies a higher output level at the expense of the other ...rm (see (29)) and then a higher informational rent. This induces each ...rm to exert a larger lobbying e¤ort than under decentralization, which yields a pro...t weight that rises at an increasing rate with substitutability (points (a) and (b)).

4.4. Welfare comparisons
Following the same procedure as in the case of complete information, let us now compare the welfare of each agent under the two regimes and derive some policy suggestions. Notice that the above considerations imply that there is a signi...cant trade-o¤ to be considered. In a sense, centralization is "obviously" preferable under complete information, in that a benevolent regulator will be better able to achieve the social goals when the actions
17

in the two markets are fully coordinated. However, things may be di¤erent

under asymmetric information. This is especially true as centralization spurs

lobbying activity. This may be self-defeating: the very notion of a benevolent

regulator is undermined by ...rms'pressures.

Let us start comparing price levels, which will prove to be crucial to the

overall results. After de...ning

c 1 'D H (with > 0 as qD > 0),

we derive from (26) and (28) the di¤erence in equilibrium prices between the

two regimes, which it is useful to write as

where

pD pC

p= z

' (z) H = I (z) + L (z) ,

(35)

I (z) = z 0

(36)

and

L (z) = ' (z) H 0,

(37)

which is non-negative by Proposition 6. This shows that the impact of sub-

stitutability on equilibrium prices is now twofold. The ...rst term in (35), i.e.

I (z), captures the "(direct) market interdependence e¤ect" under asymmet-

ric information, which yields lower prices under decentralization, as in the

case of complete information. The "lobbying e¤ect", represented by L (z),

can be seen as a second, indirect e¤ect of substitutability, one which plays

a role only in case of asymmetric information and which entails that prices

under centralization are lower than under decentralization. A single regula-

tor will be exposed to greater lobbying activity and will thus be more pro...t

oriented; therefore, she will decrease prices in order to increase production

and distribute higher informational rents.

Notice from (35) that asymmetric information inuences the two e¤ects

in the same direction. On the one hand, it mitigates the market interdepen-

dence e¤ect, by making decentralization less convenient for consumers than

under complete information. In fact, this e¤ect is now weaker (I < I), since

asymmetric information (even in the absence of any di¤erences in lobbying

activities, i.e. L = 0) involves a higher distortion in decentralized prices

(see from (26) and (30) of equilibrium that (1 + z) (1 ') H > (1 ') H).

On the other hand, asymmetric information yields a lobbying e¤ect, which

makes

centralization

relatively

more

desirable

for

consumers

(

dL dH

>

0

by

(32)

and (34)). Therefore, due to asymmetric information, prices increase in both

regimes. However, they rise more under decentralization than under central-

ization. When this distortion due to asymmetric information is large enough,

the full information result in (19) may well be reversed.

18

In order to better understand the situation and to establish our main results, it is useful to ...rst consider the following intermediate step.

Lemma 7 De...ne the function (z) : [0; 1) ! R as (z) L (z) I (z) =

' (z) H z . Then, the following is true:

(a) (0) = 0

(b) (:) is initially (strictly) decreasing, i.e. 0 (0) < 0, and then (strictly)

increasing, i.e 0 (z) > 0 for z large enough

(c) (:) is (strictly) convex, i.e. 00 > 0

(d) if H >

z '(z)

for

some

z

2

(0; 1)

there

exists

a

unique

value

of

z

(call

it z ) such that (z ) = 0

(e) (z) > 0 if and only if z 2 (z ; 1) :

Parts (a) to (c) are straightforward consequences of the de...nitions of

and ' (z) (see Proposition 6). Point (d) stresses that only if the lobbying ef-

fect, when reaching its maximum value (i.e. for z su¢ ciently high), can o¤set

the market interdependence e¤ect ( (:) > 0), then a trade-o¤ between the

two e¤ects emerges. This occurs when asymmetric information is a partic-

ularly relevant issue (H >

z '(z)

).

Otherwise,

the

market

interdependence

e¤ect always outweighs the lobbying e¤ect and regulatory centralization re-

mains preferable, as with complete information (see also Proposition 8).

For this reason, we focus hereafter on the case in which a threshold value

z 2 (0; 1) exists. The immediate implication of Lemma 7 is that decen-

tralization decreases equilibrium prices as long as substitutability among the

goods is not too high, i.e. z < z . We are now in a position to state our

main results, which we will then discuss in di¤erent steps.

Proposition 8 Assume that z 2 (z ; 1), which implies L (z) > I (z). Then,
under asymmetric cost information, regulatory decentralization i) decreases consumer surplus, i.e. CSD < CSC ii) decreases pro...ts, i.e. D < C iii) decreases subsidies, i.e. SD < SC iv) increases social welfare, i.e. W D > W C.
Otherwise, the opposite holds.

This result con...rms the implications of our complete information analysis, with the additional trade-o¤ brought about by the lobbying e¤ect. Because of asymmetric information, lobbying becomes potentially e¤ective, and we have seen that decentralization decreases the incentive to lobby (see Proposition 6).

19

In particular, an increase in the degree of substitutability between goods yields a stronger lobbying e¤ect under centralization, since each ...rm has a greater incentive to lobby the unique regulator (see (34)). Notice that the lobbying e¤ect increases with z faster than the market interdependence e¤ect. In fact, while the impact of substitutability on the latter e¤ect is constant (equal to ), the weight on pro...ts under centralization increases at an increasing rate because the competition in the political market for lobbying the regulator becomes tougher and tougher.16 When goods are closer substitutes, i.e. if z 2 (z ; 1), the strength of the lobbying e¤ect induces the Congress to prefer decentralization.
Most calculations for the proof of the di¤erent parts in Proposition 8 are shown in Appendix F, where we examine each component of the welfare function, which is expressed as the di¤erence between its value under decentralization and under centralization. More precisely, in all cases, we are able to write the di¤erence between decentralization and centralization as the sum of three terms: the full information di¤erence, the additional market interdependence e¤ect under asymmetric information and the lobbying e¤ect.
Consumers are better o¤ under the regime which grants the lower prices, and so are ...rms, as their rents depend positively on output levels. As the rents largely come from taxpayers, this category's interest goes in the opposite direction. Not surprisingly, the latter group's interest prevails. Notice that the contrast of interests between consumers and shareholders, on the one hand, and taxpayers, on the other hand, appears in the whole regulation literature since Baron and Myerson [5]. Relative to a single market regulation, here we can compare two di¤erent regimes and this comparison highlights things, which in other analyses remain implicit.
This result suggests that with more interdependent markets a decentralized regime turns out to be a reasonable structural response to nonbenevolent regulation since it mitigates the capture problem in the delegation of the regulatory authority. The trade-o¤ between the market interdependence e¤ect and the lobbying e¤ect implies that the welfare gains delivered to taxpayers under decentralization more than compensate the losses to consumers and ...rms, so that the Congress will ...nd it more desirable to decentralize market regulation.
16Notice also that (29) is decreasing in z, which means that the greater substitutability, the bigger is the negative impact of an increase in pro...t weight of a ...rm on the quantity (and pro...t) of the other. This de...nitely exacerbates the competition between the two ...rms.
20

5. Concluding remarks
In this paper we have tackled the problem of how to design the jurisdiction of a regulatory authority when two markets have interdependent demands and there is the threat of regulatory capture.
Our analysis has shown that under complete information centralized (cooperative) regulation is the best solution in terms of social welfare. This intuitive result covers a distributional aspect of great interest. Two noncooperative agencies, each regulating a single market, set lower prices than a single authority and the higher quantities produced in equilibrium increase consumer welfare. This market interdependence e¤ect de...nitely bene...ts consumers, but it reduces social welfare.
However, these results may no longer hold under asymmetric cost information as a unique regulator is more distorted to ...rms'interests as a result of lobbying activities. In this case, a trade-o¤ emerges in equilibrium between the market interdependence e¤ect and the lobbying e¤ect. When the substitutability between goods is high enough, the latter e¤ect outweighs the former and decentralizing the regulatory structure turns out to be social welfare enhancing. Hence, a decentralized (noncooperative) regime can be a good response to the non-benevolent regulation since it alleviates the capture problem.
We believe that much scope exists for future research in this ...eld and our model can be enriched in a variety of directions. We would like to mention two aspects which are left for future development.
First of all, markets may be also interconnected on the cost side. This occurs when one good enters into the production process of the other. Examples of this kind are given by water and electricity, as the former is an input for the latter.
The second idea concerns the informational framework examined in the paper. While asymmetric cost information is certainly relevant, limited regulatory knowledge about market demands would be equally interesting to consider, especially when demands are interdependent.
We believe that a greater e¤ort in these directions might shed some light on many other important issues.
Appendix A
After replacing the choice variable Si with i from (4), the regulator's optimization problem in (10) may be written as follows
21

max qi + qj
qi; i

1 2

qi2 + 2 qiqj + qj2

pj (qi; qj) qj Ci (qi) Sj 1 'iD i s:t: (P Ci).

(38)

Since (38) is decreasing in

i, ...rm i gets zero pro...ts in equilibrium (

D i

=

0).

Maximizing (38) with respect to qi yields the following ...rst-order condition

qi ci = 0.

Appendix B

We replace the choice variables S1 and S2 from (4) with 1 and 2, respectively. The regulator's optimization program in (14) may be rewritten as follows

max q1 + q2
q1;q2; 1; 2

1 2

q12 + 2 q1q2 + q22

C1 (q1)

C2 (q2) 1 '1C 1 1 '2C 2 s:t: (P C1), (P C2).

(39)

Since (39) is decreasing in 1 and 2, the two ...rms get zero pro...ts in

equilibrium (

C 1

=

C 2

= 0).

Maximizing (39) with respect to qi, i = 1; 2,

yields the following ...rst-order condition

qi qj ci = 0.

Appendix C
We derive the local necessary incentive compatibility condition (ICCi) seen in Section 4 and show that this condition is also globally su¢ cient for the cost speci...cation in (5) if qi (:) is non-increasing in ci.
The set of global incentive compatible mechanisms satis...es for any ci; bci 2 [c ; c+] the following constraint

Zc+ i (ci; ci; cj) f (cj) dcj
c

Zc+ i (ci; cj) f (cj) dcj
c

Zc+ i (bci; ci; cj) f (cj) dcj.
c
(40)

22

reseCntonitdsitpiroinva(t4e0i)nrfeoqrmuiaretisotnh,astin...cremthiedeoxepsencottedhapvreo...atnRycci+ncei n(ctii;vcej

to )f

misrep(cj) dcj

received great as

by revealing the expected

tprruot...htfuRlclcy+

its marginal costs ci i (bci; ci; cj) f (cj) dcj

2 it

[c ; c+] is at could obtain

least as for any

report bci.

Following the Baron [4] approach and using (4) and (5), the right-hand

side of (40) may be rewritten as

Zc+ i (bci; ci; cj) f (cj) dcj

c

Zc+ = [ i (bci; cj) + Ci (qi (bci) ; bci) Ci (qi (bci) ; ci)] f (cj) dcj,

(41)

c
where i (bci; cj)

i (bci; bci; cj). After substituting (41) into (40), we get

Zc+ [ i (ci; cj)

i (bci; cj)] f (cj) dcj

c

Zc+ [Ci (qi (bci) ; bci) Ci (qi (bci) ; ci)] f (cj) dcj:

c
Reversing the roles of ci and bci in (40) and (41) yields

Zc+ [ i (ci; cj)

i (bci; cj)] f (cj) dcj

c

Zc+ [Ci (qi (ci) ; bci) Ci (qi (ci) ; ci)] f (cj) dcj:

c

Combining (42) and (43) implies

(42) (43)

Zc+ [Ci (qi (bci) ; bci)
c

Ci (qi (bci) ; ci)] f (cj) dcj

23

Zc+ [ i (ci; cj)

i (bci; cj)] f (cj) dcj

c
Zc+ [Ci (qi (ci) ; bci)

Ci (qi (ci) ; ci)] f (cj) dcj.

(44)

c
Dividing the inequalities in (44) by bci ci for bci > ci and taking the limit as bci ! ci yields

Zc+

d

i (ci; cj) f dci

(cj) dcj

=

c

Zc+

@Ci (ci; @ci

:)

f

(cj )

dcj

.

c

(45)

After integrating both sides of equation (45) over [ci; c+] and combining

terms, we obtain the local necessary incentive compatibility condition (ICCi)

seen in Section 4

Zc+ Zc+ i (ci; cj) f (cj) dcj = i

c+; cj

f

(cj )

dcj

+

Zc+Zc+ @

Ci

(eci;

@eci

:) decif

(cj )

dcj .

cc

c ci

(46)

Now function

we show that condition (46) is also globally in (5) if qi (:) is non-increasing in ci. Plugging

sRuc¢+
c

cient i (bci;

for the cost cj) f (cj) dcj

from (46) for bci = ci into (45) and using (5) yields

Zc+ Zc+ Zc+Zc+

i (bci; ci; cj) f (cj) dcj = i c+; cj f (cj) dcj +

qi (eci) decif (cj) dcj

c c c bci

Zc+ + (bci ci) qi (bci) f (cj) dcj:

(47)

c

If

we

replace

R c+
c

i (c+; cj) f (cj) dcj from (46) into (47), we get after some

manipulations

Zc+ Zc+ i (bci; ci; cj) f (cj) dcj = i (ci; cj) f (cj) dcj
cc

Zc+Zbci qi (eci) decif (cj) dcj
c ci

24

Zc+ + (bci ci) qi (bci) f (cj) dcj:
c
Finally, combining terms in (48) yields

(48)

Zc+ Zc+ i (bci; ci; cj) f (cj) dcj = i (ci; cj) f (cj) dcj

cc

Zc+Zbci + [qi (bci) qi (eci)] decif (cj) dcj:

(49)

c ci

The global incentive compatibility condition in (49) is satis...ed for any ci; bci 2 [c ; c] if the second term on the right-hand side in (49) is non-positive. Our claim is that this occurs if qi (:) is non-increasing in ci. To see why such is the case, notice that, if bci ci, then the (weak) monotonicity of qi (:) implies that the integral in (49) is non-positive. When bci < ci, then the term in square brackets in (49) is nonnegative if qi (ci) is a non-increasing function but reversing the direction of the integral implies that the second term in
(49) is non-positive. Therefore, the local necessary incentive compatibility
condition (ICCi) in (46) is also globally su¢ cient for the cost speci...cation in (5) provided that qi (:) is non-increasing in ci (su¢ cient condition for this is the increasing hazard rate property).

Appendix D
We replace the choice variable Si (ci) with i (:) from (4) as shown in Appendix A. Then, substituting (ICCi) into (24) and integrating by parts yields

Zc+Zc+

max
qi(ci); i(c+;:)

qi (ci) + qj (cj)

1 2

qi2 (ci) + 2 qi (ci) qj (cj) + qj2 (cj)

cc

pj (qi (ci) ; qj (cj)) qj (cj) Ci (qi (ci)) Sj

1 'Di

F f

(ci) (ci)

qi

(ci)

+

i

c+; :

25

f (ci) f (cj) dcidcj s:t: (50)

Zc+ i c+; : f (cj) dcj 0.

(PCi)

c

Since

(50)

is

decreasing

in

R c+
c

i (c+; :) f (cj) dcj, the regulator ...nds it

optimal to give zero (expected) pro...t to the most ine¢ cient ...rm.

Maximizing pointwise (50) with respect to qi (:) yields the following ...rst-

order condition

Zc+

qi (ci) ci

1

'iD

F (ci) f (ci)

f (cj) dcj = 0.

c

Appendix E

We replace the choice variable Si (c1; c2) with i (:) from (4) as shown in Appendix B. Then, substituting (ICC1) and (ICC2) into (27) and integrating by parts yields

Zc+Zc+

max
q1(c1;c2);q2(c1;c2); 1(c+;:); 2(c+;:) cc

[ q1 (c1; c2) +

q2 (c1; c2)

1 2

q12 (c1; c2) + 2 q1 (c1; c2) q2 (c1; c2) + q22 (c1; c2)

C1 (q1 (c1; c2))

C2 (q2 (c1; c2)) 1 '1C

F f

(c1) (c1)

q1

(c1;

c2

)

+

1

c+; :

1 'C2

F f

(c2) (c2)

q2

(c1;

c2)

+

2

c+; :

f (c1) f (c2) dc1dc2 s:t: (51)

Zc+ 1 c+; : f (c2) dc2
c
Zc+ 2 c+; : f (c1) dc1
c

0 0.

26

As

(51)

decreases

in

R c+
c

1

(c+;

:)

f

(c2)

dc2

and

R c+
c

2 (c+; :) f (c1) dc1, the

...rms with the highest costs obtain zero (expected) pro...ts in equilibrium.

Maximizing pointwise (51) with respect to qi (:) yields the following ...rstorder condition

qi (ci; cj) qj (ci; cj) ci 1 'iC = 0.

Appendix F
F.1. Consumer surplus
Substituting (25) and (28) of equilibrium into (2) we ...nd after some manipulations the (expected) di¤erence in consumer surplus between decentralization and centralization. This is given by

E CSD CSC

E CS =

Zc+Zc+ 1
z (2 + z) (1 + z)
cc

2+

+ ' (z) H (2 This can be written as:
E CSD CSC

' (z) H)] f (c1) f (c2) dc1dc2.

2+z

E CS = z

(

c)2 +

(1 + z)

(52)

Zc+Zc+ 2+z z1 (1 + z)
cc

'D H ( +

c) f (c1) f (c2) dc1dc2+

Zc+Zc+ 1 + ' (z) H (2 (1 + z)
cc

' (z) H) f (c1) f (c2) dc1dc2. (53)

The ...rst two addends in (53) capture the impact of the market interdependence e¤ect on consumer surplus. The ...rst one is the full information di¤erential in (21), while the second one is the asymmetric information e¤ect purely due to market interdependence. Notice that entire expression is lower than under complete information but it is still positive, since it is derived by

27

exploiting the de...nition of . The third term in (53) comes from the lobbying e¤ect and acts in the opposite direction (as ' (z) 0), since a more pro...t-oriented single regulator bene...ts consumers by increasing production in order to distribute higher informational rents.
Substituting (36) and (37) into (52) we ...nd after some computations that the integrand is positive (which implies that decentralization makes consumers ex post better o¤) if and only if

CS = I (z) L (z) I (z) + L (z) + 2 > 0.

(54)

It is immediate to see that (54) is satis...ed if I (z) > L (z). Therefore, consumers are (ex post) better o¤ under decentralization if and only if z < z , i.e. when the market interdependence e¤ect is stronger than the lobbying e¤ect.

F.2. Pro...ts
Replacing (25) and (28) of equilibrium into (ICC), we ...nd that the (expected) di¤erence in pro...ts for each ...rm between the two regulatory regimes is given by

ED

C

E( )

Zc+Zc+Zc+

1 = (1 + z)

[z + 'H (ec)] decf (c1) f (c2) dc1dc2

cc c

Zc+Zc+

1

= (1 + z)

H (z + ' (z) H) f (c1) f (c2) dc1dc2,

cc

(55)

where the second equality is derived through integration by parts. From (55) we can see that decentralization bene...ts (ex post) ...rms when
I (z) > L (z), i.e. if z < z , since ...rms produce more and get higher informational rents. Notice that the two e¤ects play exactly the same role as in consumer surplus.

F.3. Subsidies
Substituting equilibrium outputs in (25) and (28) into (4), we obtain after some manipulations the (expected) di¤erence in subsidies between the two regulatory regimes, which is given by
28

E SD SC

ES

Zc+Zc+

1 =

z (1 + z) + 'DH

(1 + z)

cc

+ ' (z) H + 'C (z) H f (c1) f (c2) dc1dc2: We can rewrite (56) as follows

z ES = (

c)2

(56)

Zc+Zc+ z
(1 + z) 1 (1 + z)
cc

'D (

c + ) 'D Hf (c1) f (c2) dc1dc2

Zc+Zc+ 1 + ' (z) H (1 + z)
cc

+ 'C (z) H f (c1) f (c2) dc1dc2.

(57)

The ...rst two terms reect the impact of the market interdependence e¤ect

on subsidies. This is the di¤erence between the full information di¤erential

in (22) and the distortion due to asymmetric information. This expression

is positive as with complete information, which implies that the market in-

terdependence e¤ect still induces more subsidization under decentralization. However, the sign of the second term is ambiguous. When 'D is low enough

it is positive, which implies a lower extra subsidization under decentralization

relative to the case of complete information. The rationale is that the higher

prices (see the second term in (26)) allow two di¤erent regulators to subsidize relatively less production. When 'D is high the second term in (57) becomes

negative, which implies that the extra subsidization under decentralization is

even greater than with complete information. The third term in (57) repre-

sents the impact of lobbying on subsidies and shows that a unique regulator,

which cares more about the industry's interests, gives ...rms higher transfers.

Plugging (36) and (37) into (56) we ...nd after some manipulations that the

integrand is negative (which implies that decentralization makes taxpayers

ex post better o¤) if and only if

S = L (z) I (z) L (z) + I (z) + + 'DH > 0. Notice that (58) holds if L (z) > I (z) :

(58)

29

F.4. Social welfare

We compute the (expected) di¤erence in social welfare using (52) and (56). After some manipulations we ...nd

Zc+Zc+

EW = 1

z z + 2H'D

(1 + z)

cc

'H2 'C (z) + 'D f (c1) f (c2) dc1dc2:

This can be written as

(59)

E WD WC

EW =

z2 (
(1 + z)

c)2

Zc+Zc+ z + zH 1 (1 + z)
cc

'D ( +

c) 2 'DH f (c1) f (c2) dc1dc2

Zc+Zc+

1 (1 + z)

'H2 'C (z) + 'D f (c1) f (c2) dc1dc2.

cc

(60)

The sum of the ...rst two terms represents the overall impact of the market

interdependence e¤ect on social welfare. The full information result in (23)

is modi...ed by a term (the double integral in the second line) whose sign depends on the value of 'D. If the latter is low enough, that term is positive,

so the undesirability of decentralization driven by market interdependence is reduced, even though it persists. On the contrary, if 'D is high the term

in the second line becomes negative, which means that asymmetric informa-

tion makes decentralization even more detrimental. The third term in (60)

denotes the impact of the lobbying e¤ect on social welfare. The higher this

e¤ect, the more desirable becomes decentralized regulation, which dampens

the amount of subsidies and the ...rms'pro...ts, both costly in social welfare

terms.

If we insert (36) and (37) into (59) we ...nd after some algebra that the

integrand is positive (which implies that decentralization is ex post social

welfare improving) if and only if

W = L (z) I (z) L (z) + I (z) + 2'DH > 0, which is satis...ed when L (z) > I (z).

(61)

30

If the market interdependence e¤ect o¤sets the lobbying e¤ect, then we get the same result as under complete information, and the Congress still prefers centralization. This occurs when goods are quite imperfect substitutes, i.e. if z 2 (0; z ) : However, when the substitutability between goods is higher, i.e. if z 2 (z ; 1), the lobbying e¤ect prevails and the distortion to ...rms'interests becomes a serious issue under centralization.
References
[1] Armstrong, M. and D. E. M. Sappington (2007) "Recent Developments in the Theory of Regulation", in Handbook of Industrial Organization, Vol. 3, edited by M. Armstrong and R. Porter, Elsevier Science Publisher B. V., 1557-1700.
[2] Baron, D. P. (1985) "Noncooperative Regulation of a Nonlocalized Externality", in The RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 16, No. 4, 553-568.
[3] Baron, D. P. (1988) "Regulation and Legislative Choice", in The RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 19, No. 3, 467-477.
[4] Baron, D. P. (1989) "Design of Regulatory Mechanisms and Institutions", in Handbook of Industrial Organization, Vol. II, edited by R. Schmalensee and R. D. Willig, Elsevier Science Publisher B. V., 13471447.
[5] Baron, D. P. and R. B. Myerson (1982) "Regulating a Monopolist with Unknown Costs", in Econometrica, Vol. 50, No. 4, 911-930.
[6] Bushnell, J. B., Mansur, E. T. and C. Saravia (2008) "Vertical Arrangements, Market Structure, and Competition: An Analysis of Restructured US Electricity Markets", in American Economic Review, Vol. 98, 237-266.
[7] Calzolari, G. and C. Scarpa (2009) "Footloose Monopolies: Regulating a National Champion", in Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, Vol. 18, Issue 4, 1179-1214.
[8] Egging, R. G. and S. A. Gabriel (2006) "Examining Market Power in the European Natural Gas Market", in Energy Policy, Vol. 34, 2762-2778.
[9] Gilbert, R. J. and M. H. Riordan (1995) "Regulating Complementary Products: A Comparative Institutional Analysis", in The RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 26, No. 2, 243-256.
31

[10] Holz, F., von Hirschhausen, C. and C. Kemfert (2008) "A Strategic Model of European Gas Supply", in Energy Economics, Vol. 30, 766788.
[11] La¤ont, J.-J and D. Martimort (1998) "Collusion and Delegation", in The RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 29, No. 3, 280-305.
[12] La¤ont, J.-J. and D. Martimort (1999) "Separation of Regulators against Collusive Behavior", in The Rand Journal of Economics, Vol. 30, No. 2, 232-262.
[13] La¤ont, J.-J. and J. Tirole (1991) "The Politics of Government DecisionMaking: A Theory of Regulatory Capture", in The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 106, Issue 4, 1089-1127.
[14] La¤ont, J.-J. and J. Tirole (1993) A Theory of Incentives in Procurement and Regulation, MIT Press, Cambridge (Mass.).
[15] Martimort, D. (1996) "The Multiprincipal Nature of Government", in European Economic Review, Vol. 40, 673-685.
[16] Miller, J. C. III, Shughart, W. F. II and R. D. Tollison (1984) " A Note on Centralized Regulatory Review", in Public Choice, Vol. 43, 83-88.
[17] Neven, D. J. and L.-H. Röller (2005) "Consumer Surplus vs. Welfare Standard in a Political Economy Model of Merger Control", in International Journal of Industrial Organization, Vol. 23, 829-848.
[18] Poitevin, M. (2000) "Can the Theory of Incentives Explain Decentralization?", in The Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol. 33, No. 4, 878-906.
[19] Singh, N. and X. Vives (1984) "Price and Quantity Competition in a Di¤erentiated Duopoly", in The Rand Journal of Economics, Vol. 15, Issue 4, 546-554.
[20] Stigler, G. J. (1971) "The Theory of Economic Regulation", in The Bell Journal of Economic and Management Science, Vol. 2, No. 1, 3-21.
[21] Tirole, J. (1988) The Theory of Industrial Organization, MIT Press, Cambridge (Mass.).
[22] Vives, X. (1999) Oligopoly Pricing, MIT Press, Cambridge (Mass.).
32

SFB 649 Discussion Paper Series 2011
For a complete list of Discussion Papers published by the SFB 649, please visit http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de.
001 "Localising temperature risk" by Wolfgang Karl Härdle, Brenda López Cabrera, Ostap Okhrin and Weining Wang, January 2011.
002 "A Confidence Corridor for Sparse Longitudinal Data Curves" by Shuzhuan Zheng, Lijian Yang and Wolfgang Karl Härdle, January 2011.
003 "Mean Volatility Regressions" by Lu Lin, Feng Li, Lixing Zhu and Wolfgang Karl Härdle, January 2011.
004 "A Confidence Corridor for Expectile Functions" by Esra Akdeniz Duran, Mengmeng Guo and Wolfgang Karl Härdle, January 2011.
005 "Local Quantile Regression" by Wolfgang Karl Härdle, Vladimir Spokoiny and Weining Wang, January 2011.
006 "Sticky Information and Determinacy" by Alexander Meyer-Gohde, January 2011.
007 "Mean-Variance Cointegration and the Expectations Hypothesis" by Till Strohsal and Enzo Weber, February 2011.
008 "Monetary Policy, Trend Inflation and Inflation Persistence" by Fang Yao, February 2011.
009 "Exclusion in the All-Pay Auction: An Experimental Investigation" by Dietmar Fehr and Julia Schmid, February 2011.
010 "Unwillingness to Pay for Privacy: A Field Experiment" by Alastair R. Beresford, Dorothea Kübler and Sören Preibusch, February 2011.
011 "Human Capital Formation on Skill-Specific Labor Markets" by Runli Xie, February 2011.
012 "A strategic mediator who is biased into the same direction as the expert can improve information transmission" by Lydia Mechtenberg and Johannes Münster, March 2011.
013 "Spatial Risk Premium on Weather Derivatives and Hedging Weather Exposure in Electricity" by Wolfgang Karl Härdle and Maria Osipenko, March 2011.
014 "Difference based Ridge and Liu type Estimators in Semiparametric Regression Models" by Esra Akdeniz Duran, Wolfgang Karl Härdle and Maria Osipenko, March 2011.
015 "Short-Term Herding of Institutional Traders: New Evidence from the German Stock Market" by Stephanie Kremer and Dieter Nautz, March 2011.
016 "Oracally Efficient Two-Step Estimation of Generalized Additive Model" by Rong Liu, Lijian Yang and Wolfgang Karl Härdle, March 2011.
017 "The Law of Attraction: Bilateral Search and Horizontal Heterogeneity" by Dirk Hofmann and Salmai Qari, March 2011.
018 "Can crop yield risk be globally diversified?" by Xiaoliang Liu, Wei Xu and Martin Odening, March 2011.
019 "What Drives the Relationship Between Inflation and Price Dispersion? Market Power vs. Price Rigidity" by Sascha Becker, March 2011.
020 "How Computational Statistics Became the Backbone of Modern Data Science" by James E. Gentle, Wolfgang Härdle and Yuichi Mori, May 2011.
021 "Customer Reactions in Out-of-Stock Situations ­ Do promotion-induced phantom positions alleviate the similarity substitution hypothesis?" by Jana Luisa Diels and Nicole Wiebach, May 2011.
SFB 649, Spandauer Str. 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

SFB 649 Discussion Paper Series 2011
For a complete list of Discussion Papers published by the SFB 649, please visit http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de.
022 "Extreme value models in a conditional duration intensity framework" by Rodrigo Herrera and Bernhard Schipp, May 2011.
023 "Forecasting Corporate Distress in the Asian and Pacific Region" by Russ Moro, Wolfgang Härdle, Saeideh Aliakbari and Linda Hoffmann, May 2011.
024 "Identifying the Effect of Temporal Work Flexibility on Parental Time with Children" by Juliane Scheffel, May 2011.
025 "How do Unusual Working Schedules Affect Social Life?" by Juliane Scheffel, May 2011.
026 "Compensation of Unusual Working Schedules" by Juliane Scheffel, May 2011.
027 "Estimation of the characteristics of a Lévy process observed at arbitrary frequency" by Johanna Kappus and Markus Reiß, May 2011.
028 "Asymptotic equivalence and sufficiency for volatility estimation under microstructure noise" by Markus Reiß, May 2011.
029 "Pointwise adaptive estimation for quantile regression" by Markus Reiß, Yves Rozenholc and Charles A. Cuenod, May 2011.
030 "Developing web-based tools for the teaching of statistics: Our Wikis and the German Wikipedia" by Sigbert Klinke, May 2011.
031 "What Explains the German Labor Market Miracle in the Great Recession?" by Michael C. Burda and Jennifer Hunt, June 2011.
032 "The information content of central bank interest rate projections: Evidence from New Zealand" by Gunda-Alexandra Detmers and Dieter Nautz, June 2011.
033 "Asymptotics of Asynchronicity" by Markus Bibinger, June 2011. 034 "An estimator for the quadratic covariation of asynchronously observed
Itô processes with noise: Asymptotic distribution theory" by Markus Bibinger, June 2011. 035 "The economics of TARGET2 balances" by Ulrich Bindseil and Philipp Johann König, June 2011. 036 "An Indicator for National Systems of Innovation - Methodology and Application to 17 Industrialized Countries" by Heike Belitz, Marius Clemens, Christian von Hirschhausen, Jens Schmidt-Ehmcke, Axel Werwatz and Petra Zloczysti, June 2011. 037 "Neurobiology of value integration: When value impacts valuation" by Soyoung Q. Park, Thorsten Kahnt, Jörg Rieskamp and Hauke R. Heekeren, June 2011. 038 "The Neural Basis of Following Advice" by Guido Biele, Jörg Rieskamp, Lea K. Krugel and Hauke R. Heekeren, June 2011. 039 "The Persistence of "Bad" Precedents and the Need for Communication: A Coordination Experiment" by Dietmar Fehr, June 2011. 040 "News-driven Business Cycles in SVARs" by Patrick Bunk, July 2011. 041 "The Basel III framework for liquidity standards and monetary policy implementation" by Ulrich Bindseil and Jeroen Lamoot, July 2011. 042 "Pollution permits, Strategic Trading and Dynamic Technology Adoption" by Santiago Moreno-Bromberg and Luca Taschini, July 2011. 043 "CRRA Utility Maximization under Risk Constraints" by Santiago MorenoBromberg, Traian A. Pirvu and Anthony Réveillac, July 2011.
SFB 649, Spandauer Str. 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

SFB 649 Discussion Paper Series 2011
For a complete list of Discussion Papers published by the SFB 649, please visit http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de.
044 "Predicting Bid-Ask Spreads Using Long Memory Autoregressive Conditional Poisson Models" by Axel Groß-Klußmann and Nikolaus Hautsch, July 2011.
045 "Bayesian Networks and Sex-related Homicides" by Stephan Stahlschmidt, Helmut Tausendteufel and Wolfgang K. Härdle, July 2011.
046 "The Regulation of Interdependent Markets", by Raffaele Fiocco and Carlo Scarpa, July 2011.
SFB 649, Spandauer Str. 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

