BERLIN

SFB 6 4 9 E C O N O M I C R I S K

SFB 649 Discussion Paper 2013-013
A Transfer Mechanism for a Monetary Union
Philipp Engler* Simon Voigts**
* Freie Universität Berlin, Germany ** Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".
http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de ISSN 1860-5664
SFB 649, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin

A Transfer Mechanism for a Monetary Union
Philipp Engler and Simon Voigts y
March 5, 2013
Abstract We show in a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium framework that the introduction of a common currency by a group of countries with only partially integrated goods markets, incomplete ...nancial markets and no labor migration across member states, signi...cantly increases volatility of consumption and employment in the face of asymmetric shocks. We propose a simple transfer mechanism between member countries of the union that reduces this volatility. Furthermore, we show that this mechanism is more e¢ cient than anticyclical policies at the national level in terms of a better stabilization for the same budgetary e¤ects for households while in the long run deeper integration of goods markets could reduce volatility signi...cantly. Regarding its implementation, we show that the centralized provision of public goods and services at the level of the monetary union implies cross-country transfers comparable to the scheme under study. Keywords: Monetary Union, Asymmetric Shocks, Fiscal Policy, Fiscal Transfers JEL classi...cation: F41, F44, E2, E3, E52
Philipp Engler: Freie Universität Berlin, Address: Boltzmannstr. 20, 14195 Berlin, Germany, tel: +49-30-54632, email: philipp.engler@fu-berlin.de. Simon Voigts: Humboldt Universität Berlin and Collaborative Research Center 649: Economic Risk, Address: Spandauer Straße 1, 10999 Berlin, Germany, email: s.voigts@hu-berlin.de.
yThis research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk". We thank Lena Blanken and Frederik Link for valuable research assistance and Helge Berger, Kerstin Bernoth, Michael Burda, Christoph Große Ste¤en, Hong Lan, Jochen Mankart, Alexander Meyer-Gohde, Günther Rehme, Waltraud Schelkle, Lutz Weinke and seminar participants at the Jean Monnet Center of Excellence "The EU and its Citizens", the Econometric Society North American Summer Meeting 2012, the Econometric Society European Meeting 2012, the ZEW Conference on Recent Developments in Macroeconomics, the International Monetary Fund, Humboldt University and the University of Göttingen, the Verein für Socialpolitik and the conference "IntraEuropean Imbalances, Global Imbalances, International Banking, and International Financial Stability" at DIW Berlin for helpful comments.
1

1 Introduction
Now in its teenager years, the euro area has reached a crucial phase. The sovereign debt crisis has brutally shown the limits to the economic governance of a monetary union of heterogenous member states that have not agreed upon a set of adequate policies that would deal with asymmetric shocks to individual member states. For the euro area to survive it crucially matters that new instruments are designed to address these structural aws. In the public debate a lot has been said about the desirability of a deeper economic union as a complement to the monetary union. However, when the debate turns to what exactly would constitute necessary instruments and reforms, policy makers usually add little esh to that claim. In this paper we want to contribute to this debate over suitable institutional reforms to make the euro area ...t for the future. Based on simulations in a standard open economy dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model we propose a simple transfer mechanism that is suitable to address asymmetries across the monetary union.
Our starting point is the observation that national cyclical uctuations can turn a lot more severe when countries form a currency area whose degree of economic integration, i.e. with respect to goods, labor and ...nancial markets, is low1. With a common monetary policy, the volatility caused by asymmetric shocks can no longer be mitigated by a country speci...c monetary policy. The remaining options to deal with this volatility are labor migration from depressed to booming member states and an anti-cyclical ...scal policy. With insu¢ cient labor mobility across countries within the euro area the only available option is ...scal policy.
All successful currency unions of heterogenous regions have common ...scal instruments to deal with asymmetric shocks.2 These are common social security and tax systems, common debt issuance and expenditure programs and a creditor of last resort, the central bank3. Such a common set of instruments is missing in the euro area4, so that the burden of national anti-cyclical stabilization policies rests entirely on national budget de...cits and the willingness of private creditors to provide credit to national governments. Monacelli and Galí (2008) and Ferrero (2009) show that under complete ...nancial mar-
1This theoretical insight goes back to the original theory on optimum currency areas of Mundell (1961), McKinnon (1963), Kenen (1969) and Mundell (1973).
2See, for example Bordo et al. (2011) for a recent account. 3See de Grauwe (2011a,b) for an account of central banks acting as creditors of last resort to governments when multiple equilibria are possible in sovereign debt markets. 4The European Union budget is currently only around 1% of GDP and expenditures are not desigend to reduce maroeconomic volatility (see Bernoth and Engler, 2013).
2

kets such policies are indeed optimal and Nakamura and Steinsson (2011) show that ...scal multipliers can be expected to be quite large in such an environment. However, the current crisis has clearly exposed the limits to debt ...nancing and thereby to stabilization policies at the national level. It therefore appears straightforward to provide instruments for stabilization at the union level.
Within the framework of a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model we propose a ...scal transfer mechanism as one such instrument that helps to reduce volatility and to synchronize business cycles across countries. If countries of a monetary union di¤er in their state of the business cycle, for example one country growing below trend while the rest of the union growing above trend, the poorly performing country would receive a transfer from the booming part of the union. Thereby aggregate demand could be increased in the ...rst and reduced in the second. The advantages of such a transfer mechanism are straightforward: First, the cyclical uctuations are mitigated in both regions. This could not be accomplished with the common monetary policy when cycles are asymmetric. Second, if the transfers are not paid out of national government budgets, they do not a¤ect national governments' ...scal positions. Thus, national ...scal solvency issues do not arise in times of a severe downturn because of this mechanism. Risk premia related to sovereign default risk will not arise and, consequently, real interest rates will not be anticyclical as observed in the current crisis in many countries of the euro zone. Furthermore, Ricardian equivalence e¤ects do not play any role in our transfer mechanism which render it a much more e¤ective stabilization tool than national de...cit ...nanced ...scal stabilization.
We also show that in the long-run such a transfer system might not be needed as much as in the short-run as deeper integration reduces the asymmetry of business cycles in the presence of asymmetric shocks. To some extent a transfer system can thus be regarded as an instrument that is needed on the way to a deeper union that will be in place some time in the future. However, it is unclear that even strong policy measures fostering the further integration of goods, services and factor markets will result in such an optimum currency area without a need for strong central ...scal institutions as the example of the United States suggests. Deeper union in the form of a transfer mechanism may thus be desirable in any case.
In order to derive normative conclusions, we employ a standard welfare function and show that the transfer mechanism dominates domestic ...scal stabilization policies. However, both scenarios are dominated by a exible exchange rate regime with independent monetary policies, a result that even a deeper degree of trade integration cannot overturn. This implies that optimality of the currency area in the sense of the original literature on optimum
3

currency areas of Mundell (1961), McKinnon (1963) and Kenen (1969) can only be established if other economic factors are taken into account that are beyond the scope of our model framework.5
We constructed the transfer mechanism in our model in a way that it looks very much like unemployment insurance schemes that have been up and running in many countries for ages: Workers in a booming region transfer resources to workers in a depressed region. As such insurance schemes work in a quasi-automatic fashion with little delay, the well-known drawbacks of decision and implementation lags of discretionary stabilization measures do not apply. If set up like an insurance scheme, this would imply that the central ...scal authority does not gain access to resources it can spend, it is just a measure to re-distribute resources across the union in a well-de...ned, state-contingent manner for a speci...c purpose that bene...ts members in the entire region. This may thus be a step towards political and ...scal union that is politically more feasible than setting up an agency with taxing and spending power (i.e. yielding more power to "Brussels").
However, we also analyze transfers which are implicit by the central provision of public goods on the union level. We assume that in the long-run, all member countries pay the same fraction of their GDP to ...nance a unionwide public good which is constant in its size. In the face of disturbances in one country's output, the resulting gap in revenues is distributed evenly over the rest of the union. This plausible ...nancing scheme implies cross-country transfers which are very close to the transfer-scheme we are considering in this paper.
The idea of such a transfer mechanism is not new, of course. The ...rst account of a ...scal transfer mechanism is, to the best of our knowledge, Kenen (1969)6. More recently, Evers (2012) and, in tandem with our work, Farhi and Werning (2012a, b) introduced transfer schemes into DSGE models. The ...rst paper compares the e¤ects of transfers related to di¤erent macroeconomic variables in a two country model similar to ours while the second is a small open economy model. The contribution of our analysis is to shed light on the absence of Ricardian equivalence e¤ects under federal transfers schemes which make them the more e¤ective tool in stabilizing economies that are member of a currency union, a point that is also made by Farhi and Werning (2012b). In addition, we endogenize feedback e¤ects of the rest of the union which are mitigated by the transfer scheme and thereby provide a narrative for a mutually bene...tial system of union wide transfers. Furthermore, we
5One such factor could be a boost by the euro to the welfare enhancing e¤ects of the Common Market structure.
6 See also Bean (1992).
4

introduce rule of thumb consumers and discuss the role of risk premia related to sovereign debt, two features that have not been addressed by these two papers.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides the setup of the model and the transfer mechanism used for the positive analysis in section 3 and the welfare analysis in section 4. Section 5 concludes.
2 The Model
The model economy consists of two countries which ...rst have independent monetary policies and a exible exchange rate between them and then form a currency union with a common central bank. The two-country setting can be regarded as a short-cut to a multiple country setting as one country will be modelled as a small economy and the second country as a large one, which can be interpreted as an aggregate of all remaining countries. Each country is populated by two types of households, denoted as "Ricardian" and "rule-of-thumb" households as in Galí, López-Salido and Vallés (2007). The ...rst type of households have access to a non-state contingent internationally traded bond allowing them to smooth consumption across time while the latter can consume only their current disposable income. This is motivated by the ...nding of Mankiw and Campbell (1989) that aggregate consumption is explained both by a random walk component and current income.7 They consume domestically and foreign produced goods and supply labor in a competitive market to domestic ...rms. Firms are acting in a monopolistically competitive environment and set prices as a mark up over marginal costs. The only input factor to production is labor so for simplicity we abstract from investment decisions and the role of capital in production. Prices are set in a staggered fashion à la Calvo (1983). The central banks of the two countries before forming the monetary union implement monetary policies by setting the short-term interest rate following a Taylor-type rule (Taylor, 1993). The common central bank in the monetary union follows a Taylor rule with target values that are weighted averages of member countries' target realizations. Fiscal policy is modelled as a constant level of aggregate government spending while lump-sum country speci...c taxes and transfers across the union may or may not react endogenously to output uctuations.
7See also Mankiw (2000) and Galí et al. (2007) and the literature surveyed therein.
5

2.1 Households
The fraction (1 ) of the continuum of domestic households is populated by 'Ricardian' consumers (or asset-holders), and the remaining fraction by 'rule of thumb' consumers or non-asset holders. We ...rst describe their decisions with respect to consumption and then with respect to labor supply.

2.1.1 Consumption decisions

Ricardian households choose a plan

CtA; NtA; At; Bt

1 t=0

(superscript

A

refers

to asset holders) to maximize the following lifetime utility subject to a stan-

dard CES utility function

X1 Et
k=0

( k ln CtA+k

NtA+k 1+ ) 1+

and to the nominal period budget constraint

At+1 + Bt+1Et + PtCtA = Rt 1At + Rt 1BtEt + WtNtA +

pc t

Tt + T rtH

where Wt denotes the economy-wide nominal wage, NtA the amount of hours

worked,

pc t

nominal

pro...ts

per

capita

(earned

by

Ricardian

households

only)

and Tt nominal taxes which include payments for the union-wide public good

in the respective scenario. T rtH is an income transfer between home house-

holds, to which superscript H refers, and foreign households which will be

discussed in detail below. At and Bt denote the (beginning of period) holdings of bonds issued by the government of the household's home country and

by the households of the other country, respectively. Et denotes the nominal exchange rate. There are thus three distinct borrower-lender relationships:

Between domestic Ricardian households and the domestic government, be-

tween foreign Ricardian households and the foreign government and between

domestic and foreign Ricardian households.

The intertemporally optimal allocation of consumption is governed by the

following standard Euler equations, referring to the use of the domestic and

foreign bond respectively:

Rt 1 =

( Et

CtA+1 (CtA)

1 Pt ) 1 Pt+1

(Rt ) 1 =

( Et

CtA+1 (CtA)

1

Pt

) Et+1

1 Pt+1 Et

6

It follows that in the steady state, the returns on both bonds (i.e. Rt and
Rt ) are equal. Domestic and foreign interest rates are linked by an interest rate parity condition and a risk premium:

Rt = Rt Et

Et+1 Et

(exp(Bt) 1)

The risk premium, (exp(Bt) 1), is zero for a steady state with a zero net foreign asset position (B = 0)8 and positive for a negative net foreign asset

position (Bt < 0). As Schmidt-Grohé and Uribe (2003) have shown, this risk premium guarantees a unique steady state. But rather than using this risk

premium just as a technical device to ensure stationarity, which is usually

done by setting very low, in a robustness analysis we will allow it to be

"large" and we allow, in addition, the level of government debt to determine

the risk premium to show that this crucially a¤ects the relative e¤ective-

ness of national ...scal stabilization measures and the transfer mechanism we

propose.

Rule-of-thumb consumers (superscript N denotes non asset holders) do

not have access to capital marktes and respect the following one-period bud-

get constraint:

PtCtN = WtNtN Tt + T rtH

Rule-of-thumb households' period t consumption thus simply equals their
current disposable income which is determined by wage income, transfers and taxes9.
Both types of households consume the same bundle of goods, denoted as Ct. This aggregate comprises two bundles CtH and CtF , which in turn contain the ...rm speci...c good-variations from the home- and foreign country
respectively:

n Ct = 1

11

1

!H + at CtH + !H + at CtF

o1 1

where !H is the steady state import share of (private) households'consumption which is subject to an exogenous zero-expectation preference shock at which falls the AR(1)-process at = aat 1 + "t with the degree of autocorelation determined by a and white noise error term "t.10
To obtain symmetry of per ca-pita quantities in the steady state and at the same time allow for home bias in consumption, we use an import share of
8This could easily be generalized to a steady state where B =6 0. 9We calibrate the model such that consumption does not turn negative. 10This shock enters the aggregator of the foreign household with a negative sign as described below.

7

!H = n for domestic households and !F = (1 n) for foreign households,

where n is the relative size of the two countries. That is, the import share of

either country equals the relative size of the other country scaled by the same

factor 1 6 6 0. A value of = 1 implies the absence of home bias when

households spread their consumption evenly over the entire union, while for

= 0 households exclusively consume domestically produced goods.

Bundles CtH and CtF are de...ned as

CtH = (1

Z1

1
n)

CtH (i)

n

1

1
,

Zn

CtF = n 1

CtF (i)

0

1

1

where CtH (i) and CtF (i) are home and foreign produced goods of the respective ...rm i with i 2 [0; n] denoting foreign ...rms and i 2 [n; 1] denoting domestic ...rms. and are the price elasticities of substitution between home and foreign goods and between di¤erent goods produced in the same country, respectively. Cost minimization and aggregation across households results in the following standard demand functions:

CtH (i) = 1

(!H + at) 1n

PtH (i) PtH

PtH Pt

Ct

(1)

CtF

(i)

=

(!H + n

at)

PtF (i) PtF

PtF Pt

Ct

(2)

where Ct = CtN + (1 ) CtA is aggregate consumption, Ptj (i) is the price of country j ...rm i's good in units of the domestic currency, with j 2 (H; F ).

PtH, PtF and Pt are the home and foreign producer price indexes and the domestic consumer price index de...ned as

PtH = (1

Z1 n) 1 PtH (i)1
n

1 1
di ,

PtF =

Zn n 1 PtF (i)1
0

1 1
di

Pt = 1 (!H + at) PtH 1 + (!H + at) PtF 1

1 1

In the foreign country, households'consumption basket is de...ned by

Ct = 1

!F at 1 Ct ;F

1
+ !F

1
at

Ct ;H

11

where Ct ;H and Ct ;F denote the foreign households' demand for domestic and foreign goods respectively. According expressions for demand and price
indices apply.

8

The terms of trade are de...ned as the price of one unit of the foreign goods aggregate measured in units of the domestic goods aggregate:

St

=

PtF PtH

=

EtPt ;F PtH

where we made use of the assumption that the law of one price holds for individual goods.

2.1.2 Wages and labor supply

Wages are exible so that households choose their labor supply such that their marginal rates of substitution between labor and consumption equal the real wage. We assume that rule-of-thumb consumers have the same functional form of intra-period utility as Ricardian households so that in equilibrium

holds.

CtA NtA

= CtN NtN

= Wt Pt

2.2 Government
The two countries' governments have two anti-cyclical ...scal stabilization tools to deal with asymmetric shocks. The ...rst one is a variation in taxes at the national level, the second one a transfer mechanism between households in both economies.
In order to allow for purely national stabilization policies, we introduce a taxation rule and a government budget constraint while aggregate government spending G is assumed to be constant. Per-capita lump sum taxes Tt are determined by the rule
Tt = G + y YtH Ytn;H + dAt=PtH
where At is the level of period t government debt and G the constant steady state level of government spending. YtH and Ytn;H are the per capita levels of domestic output and domestic natural output, the later being the hypothetical output produced under exible prices. The di¤erence between the two is the output gap. The coe¢ cients j with j 2 (y; d) determine the strength of the reaction of government revenues to changes in the level of debt and the output gap. For anti-cyclical ...scal policies, we have to set y > 0 so that taxes are increased when the output gap is positive and that taxes fall when it is negative. Forni and Momigliano (2004) have shown that such a rule is a
9

good description of government policies in OECD countries when using real time data11 and similar rules have been empoyed by Colciago et al. (2008).
The evolution of government debt is determined by the budget constraint

(1 )At = (1 + Rt)(1 )At 1 + G Tt

Governments consume just their respective country's consumption bundle, we thus assume complete home bias in government purchases. The aggregate government goods index is therefore

G = (1

Z1

1
n)

GHt (i)

n

1

1

where GHt (i) is the domestic government's period t demand for domestic good i. The resulting demand equation is

GtH (i) = 1 1 n

PtH (i) PtH

G

(3)

For the foreign government corresponding equations apply.

The transfer we employ in our model economy works as follows: Foreign

consumers share foreign output deviations from the respective natural levels

with domestic consumers and vice versa. The per capita transfer T rtH home consumers receive from foreign consumers then is:

h T rtH = tr YtF

Ytn;F

i YtH Ytn;H

with tr determining the degree to which output uctuations are shared. Transfers are zero in the steady state and, of course, we have

(1 n)T rtH + nT rtF = 0
When the home economy's output relative to its natural level falls below the foreign country's output relative to its natural level, it receives a transfer from the foreign country. This will boost aggregate demand in the home economy and depress it in the foreign economy and thereby reduce both the volatility of output and consumption and the asymmetry of the business cycles.
11The estimated rules indicate an asymmetry in that during recessions the budget de...cit turns negative while there is no signi...cant e¤ect of a boom. In our analysis we abstract from this asymmetry. Furthermore, Forni and Momigliano (2004) ...nd that with ex-post data the state of the business cycle is not signi...cant any more. However, ex-post data are not the relevant measure for an analysis of what governments actually do due to the frequent data revisions ex-post.

10

Such a transfer mechanism has bene...ts both from a theoretical and a political perspective: First, as transfers are related to relative deviations from (constrained) e¢ cient output, e¢ cient deviations from a long run trend do not cause transfers. In our model this implies that output uctuations driven by productivity shocks cause transfers only to the extent that the output gap is not closed. The transfer would thus simply correct the ine¢ ciency related to the rigidity of prices and is therefore welfare enhancing.
Second, if constructed in this way, relative deviations from the countries' respective (possibly stochastic) trend growth are the point of reference. These transfers then would not o¤set per-capita income di¤erences and di¤erences in trend growth. They are thus purely cyclical instruments and countries with strong trend growth would not be "held back" by slow growth countries. This is certainly a strong argument relevant in a political debate as the transfer does not reduce a country's incentive to increase its productivity and to boost its growth trajectory.
Both the tax and the transfer rules are set up in a lump-sum fashion. The reason why we abstract from distortionary ways of raising revenues is that taxes and transfers would not di¤er in that respect: A euro raised would have a distortionary e¤ect no matter whether it is used as a transfer or as a tax. We will show below that the di¤erence between taxes and transfers is rather whether they imply Ricardian equivalence e¤ects or not.

2.3 Aggregate demand

Aggregate demand for good i, YtH (i), is the sum of domestic and foreign private and government demand:

YtH (i) =

PtH (i) PtH

2 41

!H

at

PtH Pt

+

1

n n

!F + at

Ct +
PtH Et Pt

PtH Ptg
Ct

3 Gt 5

De...ning YtH

h (1

n)

1 R1
n

YtH (i)

1i di

1 , one can show that

YtH (i) = (1

n) 1

PtH (i) PtH

YtH

(4)

2.4 Firms
Home ...rm i produces output Yt (i) with the production function Yt (i) = ZtNt (i)

(5)

11

where Nt (i) is ...rm i's employment and where Zt is the total factor produc-
tivity that is assumed to be the same across ...rms and which in logs follows the autoregressive process ln Zt = Z ln Zt 1 + "Zt where "Zt is a white-noise shock term. The ...rm's period t pro...ts are

t (i) = PtH (i) Yt (i) WtNt (i) ;
which, when maximized, takes account of world demand (4) and the production function (5). Assuming price setting à la Calvo, with price stickiness parameter , the objective is Vt(i),

X1

max Vt(i) =

kEt fQt;t+k t+k(i)g

Pt(i)

k=0

no

where Qt;t+k

Et

CtA Pt CtA+1 Pt+1

is the Ricardian household's discount factor

and the log-linearized optimality condition can be shown to be:

pHt o = + (1

X1 )(
k=0

)k Et f t+kg

(6)

with optimal price pHt o and where t+k = log Wt+k= Zt+kNt+k1 is the log marginal cost function in period t + k of those ...rms that reset their price
in period t and that have not reset the price between t and t + k. Finally,
log 1 is the optimal log price markup.

2.5 Aggregate prices and aggregate supply

As is standard in the literature, the New Keynesian Phillips curve,

H t

=

Et

H t+1

(t )

which determines domestic ination

H t

ptH pHt 1, is derived from equation

(6) and the expression for the evolution of the aggregate domestic price index,

pHt = pHt 1 + (1 )ptHo

with average price markup t pHt t and

(1 )(1 ) .

2.6 Monetary policy

Under a exible exchange rate, the domestic central bank follows the follow-

ing Taylor-type rule

Rt =

1 PtH PtH 1

12

An according rule applies for the foreign central bank. After having formed

a currency union, the common central bank targets the weighted average of

both countries'domestic ination rates:

RtU = 1

PtH PtH 1

1n

PtF PtF 1

!
n

3 Simulations
We now employ this model to illustrate the di¤erent stabilization properties of ...scal policy and transfers for various scenarios. In this section, we present simple impulse responses for asymmetric demand shocks to illustrate the mechanics of the model and briey discuss results for a productivity shock. In section 4 we introduce a welfare metric that allows a normative comparison of di¤erent policies for di¤erent scenarios.
The demand shock is modelled as a shock to the relative preference of all households of the union for goods produced in the country subject to the shock. We model this by changing the share of this country's production in the consumption baskets of domestic as well as of foreign households. For example, the import share of a country subject to an adverse relative preferenceshock increases because domestic households switch to foreign goods which they now perceive as relatively more attractive. The import share of the foreign country decreases at the same time as foreign households switch to products from their own country which they also perceive as relatively more attractive. We assume that the percentage change of import-shares is of the same magnitude in both countries but with opposed signs.
The goal is to analyse how the volatility of output and consumption and the co-movement of these variables di¤er across scenarios and what various stabilization policies can achieve. After presenting the calibration in section 3.1, we start with a benchmark scenario of a exible exchange rate and independent central banks in both economies that we compare with a monetary union benchmark setting in section 3.2. We also increase the degree of trade integration to see whether asymmetric shocks will cause less volatility in this setting. Then we turn to national ...scal stabilization policies and a transfer system between the two countries under a lower degree of integration in section 3.3. Finally we briey discuss these policies in a currency union for a productivity shock. In section 3.4 we construct a stabilization mechanism that allows us to prove that the transfer mechanism indeed implies a greater bang for the buck in terms of reducing macroeconomic volatility. Lastly, we present a version of the model with a union-wide public good the ...nancing of

13

which allows for implicit transfers across countries when business cycles are asymmetric in section 3.5. The idea is to illustrate one way how a transfer mechanism could be implemented.
3.1 Calibration
The parameter values used in the simulation exercises below are summarized in Table 1. We assume time periods to be quarters so we use the standard value 0.99 for the discount factor , for the consumption utility function we assume log utility, i.e. = 1. The inverse Frisch elasticity we set to one. We assume that 40% of all households do not optimize intertemporally, i.e.
= 0:4, a value that is a bit below the one found by Campbell and Mankiw (1989). For , the parameter determining the strength of the risk premium, we follow Bergin (2006) who estimated it to be 0:0038. We assume relatively short-lived shocks with a = Z = 0:9.
While we assume the home economy to make up 10 percent of the monetary union, i.e. n = 0:1, private consumption has a strong home bias with !H = 0:15 in the baseline calibration which corresponds to the fraction of eurozone imports to GDP of several countries in the euro area. With deeper integration we increase !H to 0.3, which Nakamura and Steinsson (2011) found for US regions which we regard as a natural benchmark for a monetary union. Concerning the import share of the foreign country, we assume !F = !H(1 n)=n which implies symmetry of per-capita quantities between both countries, as explained above.
We set the elasticity of substitution to 2, a value that was also used by Nakamura and Steinsson (2011) and Obstfeld and Rogo¤ (2005). For home and foreign government spending we assume a steady state governemnt spending to GDP ratio G=Y of 0.2. For the government revenue equation we set y = 0:3 in the speci...cation with national ...scal policies and zero otherwise so that taxes inrease by 0.3 percent for an increase in GDP of one percent while taxes react to increaes in government debt with d = 0:1. In the speci...cation with the transfer scheme we set tr = 0:3 and zero otherwise.

!H !F

1n

0.99 1 2 0.15 (0.3) 0.017 (0.033) 9 0.1 0.45 0.8

Za
0.75 0.9 0.9 0.0038

G=Y 0.2

d tr; y 0.1 0 (0.3) 1.5

Table 1: Parameters

14

The elasticity of substitution between goods produced in the same country, , is set to 9 which corresponds to a steady state price markup of 12.5 percent. Prices are re-set on average once a year, so that = 0:75, and the central bank reacts to ination with the standard Taylor coce¢ cient = 1:5.
3.2 Relative Demand Shock: Flexible Exchange Rates and Monetary Union
Figures 1, 2 and 3 show the impulse responses to a shift away from domestic and towards foreign goods for a scenario where each country has its own monetary policy and where both countries are linked by a exible nominal exchange rate (lines with a cross). Furthermore, Figures 1, 2 and 3 show results for a scenario of a ...xed exchange rate and a common monetary policy (solid lines), which is the benchmark setting in our analysis. The lines marked by circles correspond to a monetary union setting with deeper integration of goods markets, i.e. a lower average home bias in consumption.
Under exible exchange rates, output falls due to the shock and with it employment, real wages, marginal costs and domestic ination (not shown). In reaction to their reduced income, rule-of-thumb consumers reduce spending, while in reaction to the reduced domestic ination, the central bank reduces the nominal interest rate which depreciates the currency, and deteriorates the terms of trade. As a consequence of the decrease of the real interest rate, Ricardian consumers increase spending which works towards stabilizing output. The strong deterioration of the terms of trade further o¤sets the shock because the change in relative prices causes expenditure switching towards domestic goods. Thus, in equilibrium, rule-of-thumb-consumers' income is stabilized and consumption and employment move only little.
In the foreign economy two e¤ects work in opposite directions: The relative shift in favor of its products increases aggregate demand and output and thereby employment, real wages and marginal costs. This in turn drives up ination, the nominal and real interest rate which partially reduces aggregate demand through a reduced consumption of foreign Ricardian households and an improvement of the terms of trade that reduces net exports.
The net e¤ects of these adjustments is that both employment and consumption in both economies is remarkably stable while aggregate output is stabilized by the central banks by a¤ecting Ricardian households'consumption through real interest rates (up and down, respectively) and through net exports by quickly a¤ecting the terms of trade through the nominal exchange rate. The reaction of the central banks and the depreciation of the currency thus provide an e¤ective stabilization tool of aggregate consumption and
15

employment from the perspective of both economies. Next we turn to a scenario where Home and Foreign form a monetary
union by ...xing the nominal exchange rate between them and setting up a common central bank that now sets the short term interest rate as a weighted average of the two countries'ination rates. The central bank's response to the shifting in demand is now dominated by the inationary e¤ects of the foreign economy because of the small weight of the domestic economy in the central bank's objective function. The nominal interest rate thus increases. This implies that the real rate increases in the home economy where we have deation (not shown) while it falls in the foreign economy (the rise in ination dominates the increase of the nominal rate). The fact that the weak reaction of the central bank is dominated by changes in average ination rates in both countries exacerbates the e¤ect of the shock: In home, Ricardian consumers reduce their consumption while they increase consumption in foreign. At the same time, there is no change in the nominal exchange rate, the terms of trade deteriorate a lot less so the expenditure switching e¤ect is muted as well compared to the exible exchange rate scenario. Rule-of-thumb consumers' income thus falls which they try to o¤set by increasing their labor supply.
In the foreign economy, the lower real interest rate boosts Ricardian consumers' consumption (rather than reducing it as under exible exchange rates). Consumption of rule-of-thumb households also increases due to the rise in income. They can now a¤ord to supply less labor, as their marginal utility of working more falls with the strong increase in consumption.
Employment and consumption are thus a lot more volatile than under exible exchange rates in both economies. Stabilization through monetary policy is thus a blunt tool in the presence of an asymmetric demand shock. The two countries'business cycles move a lot more in opposite directions in response to the relative demand shock than under exible exchange rates. However, we will see that to some extent this can be mitigated by reducing the strong home-bias in consumption.
For that purpose, we increase the fraction of foreign produced goods in the domestic consumption index from 0.15 to 0.3 to increase it to the US benchmark (see Nakamura and Steinsson, 2011). We interpret this as an increase in trade integration that may be related to the fact that the monetary union boosts trade (the "Rose e¤ect").
The lines denoted with a circle in ...gures 1-3 show the results for a currency union for the scenario of deeper integration. One can see that the impulse responses for aggregate output, consumption and employment are in between the responses under less integrated goods markets under exible exchange rates and under the benchmark monetary union scenario. Integration thus leads to a reduction in employment and consumption volatility in
16

response to the shock in a monetary union, but it cannot fully replace the independent monetary policies and the exible exchange rate.
The reason behind the more benign adjustment than under less integrated goods markets is, of course, the fact that a stronger integration implies that the impact of uctuations in consumption on output is to a higher degree distributed over both countries. To provide comparability between both scenarios, the absolute change in the home bias of both countries is the same under higher integration as in the baseline scenario.12
Policies that increase the degree of integration can thus be regarded as important steps to build an optimum currency area.13 However, as long as the degree of economic integration in a currency union like the euro area is not large enough to o¤set the asymmetric e¤ects of asymmetric shocks and since such policies are unlikely to result in a quick change of market structures, other adjustment mechanisms are needed, at least for the time being. We now turn to two candidates, national ...scal policies and the union wide transfer mechanism.
3.3 Relative Demand Shock: National Fiscal Policies and Transfers
An obvious candidate for a stabilization tool is national ...scal policies, another is transfers between the two economies. We ...rst turn to ...scal policies and then compare their e¤ectiveness with that of the transfer mechanism introduced above. Figures 4 through 6 illustrate the impulse responses to the relative demand shock for the monetary union benchmark scenario (solid lines), which is the same as in ...gures 1-3, the scenario with national ...scal policy (lines with circles) and the scenario with the transfer scheme (lines with crosses).
As Ferrero (2009) demonstrated in his model, the optimal ...scal policy at the national level within a currency area is one that allows government budget de...cits to o¤set asymmetric shocks and thereby government debt to uctuate over the business cycle. However, this optimality result was based on the assumption of perfect capital markets. The run on government debt markets in the recent crisis shows that there are times when such an optimal policy stance is clearly infeasible. And even before the crisis the
12For the seminal work on the e¤ect of the degree of trade integration on the optimality of a common currency see McKinnon (1963).
13Of course, until we haven't set up a welfare function we cannot infer normative results and thereby "optimal" policies or optimality of a currency union from this positive analysis. Below, however, we will show that a higher volatility of employment translates into lower welfare.
17

degree of ...nancial market integration remained incomplete (see Lane, 2009). Furthermore, in normal times national ...scal stabilization can only work to the extent that Ricardian equivalence e¤ects are not at play.
In our model, despite the existence of rule-of-thumb-consumers, the fact that the governments' creditors are intertemporally optimizing households, Ricardian equivalence e¤ects do matter. The anticipation of the long-run consolidation of the public budged reduces the e¤ectiveness of ...scal policy because the reduction of taxes is entirely ...nanced by credit from Ricardian households. Because the tax reduction also applies for rule-of-thumb consumers, the amount of credit given out per Ricardian household exceeds the reduction of taxes per person. The resulting net decrease of the Ricardian's income during the time when taxes are below trend is reversed in the later period when the government consolidates its budget, ...nancing the redemption of debt by above-trend taxes. This temporal uctuation of income has a present value of zero, neglecting interest. The Ricardian household o¤sets the uctuation by borrowing from the foreign country when taxes are lowered while repaying the debt when taxes are above trend level. As the present discounted value of the tax change is zero he does not change his consumption. This behavior of Ricardian households restricts the e¢ cacy of ...scal policy to inuence aggregate demand to credit-constrained households.
However, the presence of a risk-premium gives rise to an additional mechanism which further impedes the e¢ cacy of this kind of ...scal policy. As borrowing by Ricardian households increases due to the policy intervention, this policy measure indirectly increases the interest rate which is a positive function of the stock of external debt. The resulting slight decrease of consumption is observed in ...gure 6. The increase in the perceived default risk thus decreases the e¤ectiveness of the national anticyclical tax policy even further.14
Taking a look at the whole picture, we observe that despite these weakening mechanisms, the direct e¤ect on the consumption of rule-of-thumb households (...gure 6) leads to a reasonable amount of stabilization of aggre-
14Please notice that the reasoning of this passage does not depend on the fact that the government ...nances itself exclusively via credit from domestic Ricardian households. If governments were to sell bonds to foreign households, the ...scal policy's e¤ect on the Ricardian household's budget would be zero in present-value terms as well. The reason to choose the speci...cation at hand is that if governments sell bonds only to domestic Ricardian households, then the occurrence of the risk-premium related to private net foreign debt is conditional on the presence of Ricardian equivalence: Government debt is passed on to the foreign country (where it evokes the premium) just when equivalence holds. In the alternative speci...cation in which the government sells its bonds to foreign households, a risk premium related to the government's net external debt would raise the interest rate independent of the behavior of the Ricardian households.
18

gate output and employment (...gure 4). A tool that is not subject to Ricardian equivalence e¤ects and resulting
risk premia is the transfer between countries introduced above. In order to make the national ...scal stabilization scenario quantitatively comparable with the ...scal transfer scenario, we set tr = y = 0:3.15
After the shock, domestic households receive a transfer and one can clearly see that both rule-of-thumb and Ricardian consumers'consumption increases relative to the benchmark scenario. The fact that the Ricardian households' consumption reacts strongly to the transfer (when compared with the scenario without transfers and compared to the scenario with taxes) is due to the fact that these households do not regard it as temporary. Conditioning on this speci...c shock it is a gift that does not have to be returned to the donor.
Another interpretation of the transfer mechanism is that it works like an insurance: The resources that the Ricardians regard as available are no longer determined by the present discounted value of current and future domestic output but rather by a weighted average of the present discounted values of domestic and foreign output. Any asymmetric changes in output therefore have a muted e¤ect on Ricardian households'consumption response.
The muted consumption responses also imply that the deviations of employment from the steady state are lower after the shock, in particular of rule of thumb households. This result will turn out to be crucial for the increase in welfare that will be shown below. This is a remarkable ...nding, given that transfers between countries are zero in unconditional expectations if shocks are assumed to be evenly distributed over member countries. That is, the welfare improvement from this policy is a free lunch in the sense that in unconditional expectations every member country is better o¤.
As the transfer mechanism is constructed as a transfer between households across the monetary union rather than between governments, it very much mimics an unemployment insurance. An unemployment insurance has the advantage that it acts in a quasi-automatic and immediate fashion: When incomes fall due to temporary unemployment, households receive a transfer without delay, thereby quickly stabilizing aggregate demand. And as unemployment insurance schemes are only designed to support short-term or
15 In the transfer-rule, parameter tr multiplies the di¤erence of output gaps in both countries, while in the two ...scal rules y multiplies the output gap of the respective country. Albeit the di¤erences are of negligible order, we cannot claim with certainty that the policies employed in both scenario are perfectly comparable with respect to their budgetary e¤ect on households. In chapter 3.5, we pick up on this issue and present a comparison which ensures that the budgetary e¤ects of both policies are absolutely identical.
19

medium-term unemployment, any increase in long-term unemployment related to a decline in trend growth is not covered. And this is exactly what our model implies.
The alternative, a transfer between governments, would be much more di¢ cult to implement. It would require the di¢ cult task to determine the state of the business cycle in real time. This is di¢ cult because it is almost impossible to di¤erentiate e¢ cient from ine¢ cient uctuations in real time. Furthermore, transfers between governments intended to a¤ect aggregate demand are likely to su¤er from the same time lags as discretionary spending programs.
One way of interpreting the transfer mechanism is to regard the e¤ect of the shock on the foreign economy as an externality (in this case a positive one) that the foreign economy is exposed to. The transfer ensures the domestic economy internalizes this externality. Furthermore, the transfer is "self-...nanced" by the e¤ect of the shock on the foreign economy in that it simply reverses the increase in output due to the shock.
3.4 Productivity shock
Figure 7-9 show the adjustment to an exogenous increase in total factor productivity in the scenario of no policy intervention (solid lines), ...scal policy as de...ned above (marked by circles) and the transfer scheme (marked by crosses). First, we focus on the scenario of no policy intervention. Here two e¤ects work in opposite directions: The increase in total factor productivity causes a reduction of marginal costs and ...rms able to re-set their prices reduce them. In the monetary union setting, the central bank reduces its policy rate less than neccessary to reduce the short-term real rate when the shock occurs in a small member state. The real rate thus increases initially but falls later on as prices return to their initial levels so that the overall e¤ect on the long-term real rate (i.e. the cumulative short-term rates) is negative. Ricardian households'consumption thus increases. However, as this increase in demand is muted in the currency union setting (because the central bank reduces its policy rate only slightly), the increase in Ricardians' consumption demand does not o¤set the fall in labor demand due to the increase in productivity. The real wage and employment thus fall and consequently ruleof thumbers'consumption which further depresses output, employment and wages. However, a second e¤ect works against this contraction. The decrease in marginal costs causes a decrease in domestic ination and thereby a depreciation of the terms of trade. This triggers expenditure switching away from foreign and towards domestic goods, increasing aggregate demand, output and employment.
20

Both e¤ects jointly explain the adjustment of output observed in the ...gure: The adverse e¤ect caused by the rule-of-thumb consumers dominates in the ...rst two periods when the impact of the shock is still strong and the depreciation of the terms of trade has not yet accumulated to its maximum. As time elapses, the advancement of the shock's decay reduces the strength of the adverse e¤ect stemming from the rule-of-thumb consumers, while the depreciation of the terms of trade further accumulates and thereby enforces expenditure switching. Hence, the second e¤ect is dominating from period two on, and we observe a sustained increase in output subsequent to the initial slump.
Now we turn to the two policy measures under study, which both cause an increase in output and thereby a reduction of the loss in employment, the welfare-relevant variable. First notice that under exible prices, there would be a stronger increase in output as all ...rms would be able to instantly lower prices in order to induce more expenditure switching and increase output. As both policies aim at reducing the gap to the natural allocation caused by the price rigidity, they boost output via the reduction of taxes or by the receipt of a transfer. From the same reasoning as in the previous section, the output-enhancing e¤ect of ...scal policy is constrained by Ricardian equivalence and, further limiting the policy's e¢ cacy, by resulting e¤ects of the risk premium. As these impediments to not apply for transfer payments, we observe a stronger increment of output in the latter case, implying a better stabilization of employment.
3.5 Comparison
In this section, we make tax- and transfer policies directly comparable by constructing a transfer-scheme in which transfers substitute tax-policies to an extent such that the budgetary e¤ects for households are identical for both policy measures. Thereby we show that the substitution of national ...scal policies by transfer payments o¤ers more "bang for the same buck" in terms of stabilizing the macroeconomic environment in the monetary union.
In building the setup for this experiment, we ...rst slightly modify the taxation-rules of both countries by adding the respective transfer payment. Hence, for country H we have:
Tt = G + y YtH Ytn;H + dAt=PtH + T rtH
This speci...cation implies that cross-country transfers substitute ...scal policy measures. Consider e.g. a situation in which ...scal policy schedules an
21

increase of taxes while at the same time the transfer scheme schedules the payment of a transfer. In the policy rule at hand, the rise in Tt is reduced by the amount of transfer-payments T rtH < 0.
The aim of this experiment is to compare the exclusive use of national ...scal policies to a scenario in which national ...scal policies are partly substituted by cross-country transfers. The crucial step is to ensure that the budgetary e¤ects for households are identical in both scenario. To understand how we achieve this aim, consider that a cross-country transfer means a loss for the households of the paying country and a gain for the households of the recipient country. This means for our purpose that we have to restrict the ow of cross-country transfers to situations in which the transfer's budgetary e¤ects in both countries are backed by ...scal policy measures which have the same budgetary e¤ect. Hence, the transfer only substitutes the tax measure which exist in the alternative scenario and we end up with the same budgetary positions in both countries under both scenarios. To give an example, consider a situation in which ...scal rules imply tax schedules moving in opposite direction in both countries. In such a situation, a tax increase in one country is substituted by a payment of a transfer to the other country, while in the other country the tax decrease is substituted by the receipt of the transfer.
The following transfer scheme ful...lls the requirement of restricting transfers to the above mentioned situations:

T rtH = min max

Y YtH

Y n;H

;n 1n

Y

YtF

Y n;F

;0

+ max min

Y YtH

Y n;H

n ;
1n

Y

YtF

Y n;F

;0

nT rtF = (1 n) T rtH

To see how this scheme works, ...rst notice that the transfer is de...ned in per-capita units of the home country. The related transfer in the foreign country is governed by the second equation, taking into account di¤erent country sizes. If a transfer occurs, it substitutes changes in taxation from national ...scal policy via the last terms in the ...scal rules as explained above. Now consider the transfer scheme itself: The ...rst term implies that a transfer is paid out by country H (T rtH < 0) if taxes are increased in the home country ( Y YtH Y n;H > 0) and and the same time decreased in the foreign country ( Y YtF Y n;F < 0). In this case, the inner max-function selects the tax-variation which is smaller in absolute value (both of its arguments are

22

negative), while the outer min-function has no e¤ect as the resulting value of the inner function is negative.
Hence, country H pays a transfer in the magnitude of the weaker of the two opposite tax-variations. This leads to a full substitution of the weaker tax-variation: While the total e¤ect on the households'income remains unchanged, this income is now paid (received) as a transfer instead of being paid (received) as a tax variation to (from) the respective government. The stronger of the two opposite tax-variations is partially substituted by transfers, keeping the total e¤ect on the household´s income constant as well.
The second term triggers transfers paid out by country F in situations in which national policies schedule a tax increase in country F and a tax reduction in country H. Then the inner min-function selects the magnitude of the smaller policy which determines the size of the transfer. It can easily be veri...ed that for tax changes in the same direction in both countries no transfer occurs.
With this transfer scheme and the modi...ed taxation-rules introduced above, we can compare the di¤erent policies knowing that both policies bear the very same e¤ect on the households'income in both countries. This property of the comparison is crucial because it allows the following conclusion: As shown below in the simulation exercises, the policy regime in which national policies are partly substituted by transfers achieves a higher degree of macroeconomic stability than the scenario without transfers. Since the policies prevailing in both scenarios have exactly the same e¤ect on household income in either country, this gain in macroeconomic stability has to be due to a superior stabilizing e¤ect of transfers, as all things except the partial substitution of anti-cyclical taxation are equal. In other words, one unit of income has to have a stronger stabilizing e¤ect if it is transferred between the countries than if it was deducted from the households'income via taxincreases in the paying country and given to the household in the recipient country via tax reductions.
We now turn to a simulation exercise for which we present the percent reduction in employment volatility due to the partial substitution, holding all households'budgetary positions constant. The simulation comprises 1000 periods and 1%-shocks to both countries'import shares (preference shocks) as well as 1%-shocks to both countries'total factor productivity.16'17
16The simulation is conducted using the extended-path method in Dynare. We do not show the means under both scenarios as they are identical because of the deterministic method.
17The reason we do not use the transfer scheme of this experiment in the welfare analysis below is a technical one: The use of max() and min() functions requires a global deter-
23

Shock

Variable

preferences technology

NH NF NH NF

% Reduction of Variance
16 16 45 19

Table 2: Comparison transfer and tax policy
The volatility of employment falls in both countries if national ...scal policies are substituted by transfers. Unsurprisingly the reduction is considerably larger for the small home economy. Hence, this experiment con...rms the reduction in the volatility of employment.

3.6 Union wide public goods and implicit transfers
So far we have set up transfer schemes as explicit transfers between households. However, an important mechanism which in existing currency unions allows for implicit transfers across regions is the changing contributions to the provision of union-wide public goods. When a regional recession occurs, federal tax payments fall and other regions have to bear a bigger share of the tax burden (unless federal debt increases). In this section, we propose a mechanism with such implicit cross-country transfers arising from the centralized provision of union wide public goods, denoted Gunion. We also sketch a normative argument in favor of such implicit transfer from a public ...nance perspective by referring to the Samuelson rule.
It is assumed that all citizens of the union consume the same constant amount of Gunion. Concerning funding, we assume a simple taxation scheme in which the fraction of a country's output devoted to ...nance the union-wide public good is the same for all countries in the long run. Accordingly, with our assumption of equal per capita GDPs, the ...nancing scheme does not imply long-run transfers between the regions. However, short-run uctuations of per capita taxes give rise to transfers towards member states facing negative shocks. The ...nancing scheme is governed by the following set of equations:
Ttunion;j = Ytj + Xt j 2 [H; F ]
ministic solution method which does not allow for a technically awless welfare analysis. Hence, we only report the simulated second moments of employment under both scenarios. Employment volatility will be shown to be the welfare relevant variable.
24

(1 n) YtH + Xt + n YtF + Xt = Gunion
Taxes paid to the union level are split into cyclical components Ytj and a corrective term Xt which is the same for both countries. The corrective component Xt is determined by the second equation, which ensures a balanced budget in every period.
The tax rate equals the share of Gunion in every country's long-run output, so that total tax revenues arising from cyclical payments of all member states cover Gunion in the absence of shocks. Hence, we have Xt = 0 in the steady state.
To see why this scheme implies cross-country transfers in the face of asymmetric shocks, notice that a di¤erence in output levels implies a difference in the cyclical components of taxes paid to the union. From the second equation, the symmetric correction term will adjust such that total revenues received by the union remain constant. This construction gives rise to cross-country transfers, as, for example, a positive deviation of output in one country increases the taxes this country pays from the cyclical component, so that the correction term turns negative for the union's budget to remain balanced. Hence, the country facing the positive shock pays a higher total amount of taxes for the same level of public goods, while the additional revenues are distributed as tax-refunds in the rest of the union. Also notice that no implicit transfers arise if both countries face the same level of output. In the case of YtH = YtF = Yt, the second equation implies Xt = Gunion Yt so the correction term simply o¤sets uctuations in the cyclical components. Hence, taxes paid by both countries remain unchanged if the shock is symmetric.
Figure 10 illustrates the macroeconomic implications of a partial shift of the provision of public goods on the union level. In this ...gure we again compare two scenario: In the baseline scenario of a monetary union, national governments spend 20% of each country's GDP to ...nance the provision of national public goods (no markers). In the second scenario (marked by circles), 10% of each country's GDP is devoted to ...nance the provision of a union-wide public good, while 10% of each country's GDP remain used for national-wide public goods. We consider the preference shock introduced above, that is a 1% change in import shares.
Focusing on both countries'contributions to the ...nancing of the unionwide public good, we observe that taxes paid to the union decrease in the home country and increase in the foreign country. This is of course driven by the cyclical components Y H and Y F , because the adjustment component is almost constant due to the symmetric e¤ect of the shock.
25

The budgetary e¤ects of this ...nancing scheme closely mimics the transfer scheme studied in this paper: The country subject to a adverse shock enjoys a tax-reduction ...nanced by the country which is in a more favorable position. Furthermore, uctuations of each country's contribution is zero in expectations, so there is no transfer of resources in the long run. The stabilizing e¤ect induced by this ...nancing scheme is not limited to rule-of-thumb consumers, because there is not Ricardian equivalence as a transfer of resources does not bring about a reallocation in the reverse direction in the future.
Hence, the shift of the provision on public goods on the union level has the very same macroeconomic implications as the setup of the proposed transfer scheme. In the ...gure, we observe a considerable stabilization in output, consumption and employment in either country. Behind this e¤ect is the same reasoning as the stabilization provided by the transfer scheme discussed in the previous chapter. Unsurprisingly, the gain in macroeconomic stability implies a gain in welfare, as shown in the next chapter.
It is easy to make the normative case for such implicit transfers by alluding to the Samuelson rule (Samuelson, 1954). The Samuelson rule states that the sum of marginal rates of substitution between the public good and the private good of all households in the union has to equal the relative price of the public good. The constant level of the public good implies a constant level of marginal utility of consuming it across the union. In a regional recession, the marginal rate of substitution falls in that region (because of a fall in consumption) and, given convex marginal utilities of consumption, an optimal tax scheme would imply a reduced taxation in that region and an increased taxation in the other regions in order to return to an optimum.

4 Welfare Analysis

In order to compare the di¤erent scenarios of sections 3.2-3.4 and 3.6 in their

e¤ect on the countries' welfare, we employ the following welfare function

WtH that is a weighted average of the Ricardian household's intertemporal utility function and an intertemporal utility function of the rule-of-thumb

consumers:

WtH

X1 Et
k=0

(
k

(1 (1

) ln CtA+k + ( )NtA+k 1+ ) 1+

ln CtN+k ( )NtN+k 1+
1+

)

(7)

We thus assume that the rule-of-thumb consumers' consumption and employment can be evaluated from an intertemporal perspective even though

26

they do not use this perspective for their consumption choice. For the foreign
economy an according welfare function applies.
In the appendix we show that when employing a second order approximation to WHt , one can express the welfare loss of business cycle uctuations, expressed as a fraction of steady state consumption, as a function of the weighted unconditional variances of employment18:

WHt WH = (1 )V ar NtA + V ar NtN

for = 1. The relative welfare gain (in percent) of moving from the bench-

mark scenario to a scenario i 2 (1; 2; 3; 4) , denoted as

i t

is therefore

100

(WtH

)WH i (WHt

(WtH )WH j

WH

) j

,

i t

=

100

(1 (1

)V ari NtA + V ari NtN )V arj (NtA) + V arj (NtN )

1

where Vari (Nt) with i 2 (1; 2; 3; 4) is the variance of employment under scenario i and index j stands for the benchmark scenario. Table 3 presents these gains relative to the benchmark currency union scenario for the scenarios shown in section 3 (note that a negative sign indicates a welfare gain compared to the benchmark because volatility falls for higher welfare levels):

Type of shock

Country

(1) Fl. Ex.
Rate

i t
Scenario

(2) (3)

(4)

Deeper Fisc. Transfer

Integr. Policy

(2),(3), (4)

(5) Publ. Goods

De-

H

-97 -61 -31 -45

-79 -18

mand

F

-100 -60 -40

-40

-80 -20

Productivity

H F

-91 -52 -36 -51 -48 -20 -21 -19

-64 -4 -46 -1

Table 3: Welfare gains compared to currency union benchmark (in %)
18The variance of consumption drops out of this expression for the special case of log utility.
27

The welfare e¤ects were computed for both the domestic and the foreign economy by running simulations over 100000 periods for the two shocks separately but for both countries a¤ected by country speci...c shocks. Table 3 tells the same story as the impulse response functions presented above: The benchmark currency union incurs signi...cant welfare costs in terms of employment volatility both when compared to a exible exchange rate scenario and when compared to a currency union with a high degree of goods market integration, ...scal stabilization and ...scal transfers. The biggest welfare gains within the currency union arrangement are to be expected from a deepened integration of goods markets while a system of transfers allows much larger gains compared to ...scal stabilization at the national level. Lastly, when deeper integration is combined with national ...scal stabilization and the transfer mechanism, welfare in the monetary union increases further but never reaches welfare under exible exchange rates.
Turning to the di¤erences between the shocks, one can clearly see that for the demand shock, the transfer mechanism clearly dominates the tax policy when the goal is to maximize welfare, i.e. minimize employment volatility. Welfare is clearly higher for the small domestic economy while it is at the same level in the foreign economy. In contrast, for the productivity shock the transfer dominates only for the small domestic economy, the large foreign economy is worse o¤. However, as is well-known from the empirical New Keynesian literature (see e.g. Smets and Wouters, 2003), the demand shock is of much bigger importance for overall volatility in the euro area so that a transfer is likely to be a necessary instrument to reduce overall volatility and increase overall welfare.
In light of these results one can certainly ask why one should not simply abandon the monetary union and return to a world of exible exchange rates which obviously delivers the highest levels of welfare. But one should not forget that we focused on only one aspect of monetary integration, volatility, which has to be assessed jointly with other aspects. One such aspect could be a boost to growth that we cannot adress in our framework.
5 Conclusion
We show that a currency union formed by economies that are not perfectly integrated may experience large volatility and asymmetric business cycles when these economies are hit by asymmetric shocks. We propose a transfer mechanism between the members of the union that can o¤set these asym-
28

metric e¤ects and argue that this might be a policy option until deeper trade (and possibly ...nancial and labor market) integration is accomplished. Furthermore, we show that such a transfer mechanism is more e¤ective than ...scal stabilization measures at the national level as Ricardian equivalence e¤ects and risk premia do not arise. Lastly, we show that such transfers increase welfare more than ...scal stabilization.
The mechanism looks very much like an insurance scheme that o¤sets the e¤ects on consumption caused by deviations of output from trend relative to other member economies'output deviations from trend. When one country booms while another country contracts, a transfer from the booming to the depressed country sets in. Under the assumption of these asymmetric shocks being equally and identically distributed across countries, the net-payments over time will be zero. There is thus no permanent transfer between countries.
The euro area, which is clearly in need for new business cycle stabilization tools but which lacks strong support for deeper political union with a European authority equipped with spending and taxing powers that might be used as a stabilization tools at the national level, this last aspect might make it politically implementable: When the mechanism implies no net transfers on average over time, but a reduced volatility of employment and consumption, everyone is better o¤. On average, no money is transferred to "Brussels"by richer economies.
One obvious candidate for a real world equivalent of such a mechanism is an unemployment scheme that re-distributes resources across the monetary union. Another, politically more ambitious, candidate is the provision of union wide public goods. We present a variant of the model with taxation rules related to the relative state of the business cycle for ...nancing union wide public goods that allow for implicit transfers across countries and which also have very bene...cial welfare e¤ects.
29

References
[1] Charles R. Bean (1992): Economic and Monetary Union in Europe, The Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 6, No. 4 (Autumn), 31-52.
[2] Bergin, Paul R. (2006): How well can the New Open Economy Macroeconomics explain the exchange rate and current account? Journal of International Money and Finance 25, 675-701.
[3] Bernoth, Kerstin and Philipp Engler (2013): A Transfer Mechanism as a Stabilization Tool in the EMU, Vol. : 3, No. 1, 3-8, DIW Economic Bulletin.
[4] Bordo, Michael D., Agnieszka Markiewicz and Lars Jonung (2011): A Fiscal Union for the Euro: Some Lessons from History, NBER Working Paper 17380.
[5] Calvo, Guillermo (1983): Staggered Prices in a Utility Maximizing Framework. Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, 383-398.
[6] Campbell, John Y. and N. Gregory Mankiw (1989): Consumption, Income and Interest Rates: Reinterpreting the Time Series Evidence, in: Olivier Jean Blanchard and Stanley Fischer, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual: 1989. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989, 185­ 216.
[7] Colciago, Andrea, Tiziano Ropele, Anton Muscatelli and Patrizio Tirelli (2008): The Role of Fiscal Policy in a Monetary Union: Are National Automatic Stabilizers E¤ective? Review of Intrenational Economics, Vol. 16, Issue 3 (August), 591­610.
[8] De Grauwe, Paul (2011a): The Governance of a Fragile Eurozone, mimeo.
[9] De Grauwe, Paul (2011b): The European Central Bank: Lender of Last Resort in the Government Bond Markets?, Cesifo Working Paper 3569.
[10] Evers, Michael P. (2012): Federal ...scal transfer rules in monetary unions, European Economic Review, Vol. 56, Issue 3 (April), 507­ 525.
[11] Farhi, Emmanuel and Ivan Werning (2012a): Fiscal Unions, mimeo, (July).
[12] Farhi, Emmanuel and Ivan Werning (2012b): Fiscal Multipliers: Liquidity Traps and Currency Unions, mimeo, (November).
30

[13] Ferrero, Andrea (2009): Fiscal and Monetary Rules for a Currency Union, Journal of International Economics, 77, 1-10.
[14] Forni, Lorenzo and Sandro Momigliano (2004): Cyclical Sensitivity of Fiscal Policies Based on real Time Data, Applied Economics Quarterly, Vol. 50 No. 3 (December).
[15] Galí, Jordi (2008): Monetary Policy, Ination, and the Business Cycle. An Introduction to the New Keynesian Framework, Princeton, NJ, USA, Princeton University Press.
[16] Galí, Jordi, J. David López-Salido and Javier Vallés (2007): Understanding the E¤ects of Government Spending on Consumption, Journal of the European Economic Association, 5, No. 1, 227­270.
[17] Galí, Jordi and Monacelli, Tommaso (2008): Optimal monetary and ...scal policy in a currency union, Journal of International Economics, vol. 76(1), 116-132.
[18] Kenen, Peter B. (1969): The Theory of Optimum Currency Areas: An Eclectic View, in: R.A. Mundell and A.K. Swoboda, eds.: Monetary Problems of the International
Economy, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
[19] Lane, Philip R. (2009): EMU and Financial Integration, In: Mazkowiak, B., Mongelli, F.P., Noblet, G., Smets, F. (Eds.): The Euro at Ten­ Lessons and Challenges, European Central Bank, 82-115.
[20] Mankiw, Gregory (2000): The Savers­Spenders Theory of Fiscal Policy, American Economic Review, P&P, 120-125.
[21] McKinnon, Ronald I. (1963): Optimum Currency Areas, The American Economic Review , 53(4), 717-725
[22] Mundell, Robert A. (1961): A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas, The American Economic Review, 51(4), 657-665.
[23] Nakamura, Emi and Jón Steinsson (2011): Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence from U.S. Regions, NBER Working Paper No.17391.
[24] Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogo¤ (2005): Global Current Account Imbalances and Exchange Rate Adjustments, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 67-146.
[25] Nakamura and Steinsson (2011): Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence from U.S. Regions, NBER Working Paper No. 17391.
[26] Samuelson, Paul (1954): The Pure Theory of Public Expenditure, The Review of Economics and Statistics, 36, No. 4, 387­389.
31

[27] Schmit-Grohé and Uribe (2003): Closing Small Open Economy Models, Journal of International Economics, 61, 163­185.
[28] Frank Smets and Raf Wouters (2003): An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium Model of the Euro Area, Journal of the European Economic Association, 1(5), 1123­1175.
[29] Taylor, John, (1993): Discretion versus policy rules in practice, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 39, 195­ 214.
32

A Appendix

A.1 Welfare Function

A utility function U (Ct; Nt), when aproximated up to second order around the deterministic steady state, can be written as

U (Ct; Nt)

U (C; N )

=

UC C Ct C

C

+

UCC CC 2

Ct C 2 C

+ UN N Nt N

N

+

UNN N N 2

Nt N 2 N

Making

use

of

the

second

order

Taylor

approximation

Xt X X

=

xbt

+

1 2

xb2t

and

re-arranging, we get

01

U (Ct; Nt)

U (C; N )

=

UCC @

bct + UN N
UC C

+

1 2

1

+

UCC C UC

bc2t

nbt

+

1 2

1

+

UNN N UN

nbt2

A

where we neglected terms of an order higher than two. For log utility in

consumption and U (N ) =

N 1+ 1+

this reduces to

U (Ct; Nt)

U (C; N ) = bct

N 1+

nbt

+

1 2

(1

+

) nb2t

Plugging this into equation (7) we get

8

X1 < (1

WtH W H = Et

k
:

k=0

)bct (1

) N A 1+

nbtA

+

1 2

(1

+

)

nbAt 2

N N 1+

nbNt

+

1 2

(1

+

)

nbtN 2

9 = ;

Taking the limit ! 1, we can express the welfare measure in terms of employment variances,

WtH W H =

1h 2 (1 + ) (1

i ) N A 1+ V ar nbtA + N N 1+ V ar nbNt

which, when noting that V ar

nbAt

=

,V ar(Nt)
N2

can

be

re-written

in

terms

the

employment volatility in levels,

WtH W H =

1h (1 + ) (1
2

i ) N A 1 V ar NtA + N N 1 V ar NtN

which reduces to

WtH W H = (1 )V ar NtA + V ar NtN

for = 1.

33

A.2 Impulse Responses
34

-3
x 10 0

Output Home

-2

-4

-6

12345678

-3
x 10

Consumption Home

0

-2

-4

-6 12345678

-3
x 10

Employment Home

0

-2

-4

-6

-8 12345678

-4
x 10 8

Output Foreign

6

4

2

0

12345678

-4
x 10

Consumption Foreign

6

4

2

0 12345678

-4
x 10 10

Employment Foreign

5

0 12345678

Figure 1: Demand shock, aggregate variables I. Solid line: MU benchmark; Circles: MU with deeper integration; Crosses: Flexible exchange rate

x

-4
10

Flexible

Exch.

Rates:

Nominal

Int.

Rate

Home

0

-2

-4

-6 12
-4
x 10 10
5 0 -5
12
-5
x 10 0

3456 Real Rate Home
3456 Union Target Rate

7 7

-0.5

-1

-1.5 1234567

8 8 8

x 10-5Flexible Exch. Rates: Nominal Int. Rate Foreign 6

4

2

0 12

-5
x 10

0

-5

-10

-15 1

2

-3
x 10 4 3 2 1 0
12

3456 Real Rate Foreign
3456 Terms of Trade
3456

7 7 7

8 8 8

Figure 2: Demand shock, aggregate variables II. Solid line: MU benchmark; Circles: MU with deeper integration; Crosses: Flexible exchange rate

35

-4
x 10

Consumption Ricardian Home

5

0

-5

1234567

Consumption Rule-of-Thumb Home

-0.005

-0.01

-0.015 1234567

-3
x 10 5 0 -5 -10 -15
1

2

Employment Ricardian Home 3456

7

-3
x 10 3

Employment Rule-of-Thumb Home

2

1

0

1234567

8 8 8 8

-5
x 10 10
5 0 -5
1
-3
x 10

Consumption Ricardian Foreign
234567 Consumption Rule-of-Thumb Foreign

1

0 1
-4
x 10 20

2

3456 Employment Ricardian Foreign

7

10

0 1
-4
x 10 0

234567 Employment Rule-of-Thumb Foreign

-2

-4 1234567

8 8 8 8

Figure 3: Demand shock, disaggregated variables. Solid line: MU benchmark; Circles: MU with deeper integration; Crosses: Flexible exchange rate

-3
x 10 0

Output Home

-2

-4

-6

12345678

-3
x 10

Consumption Home

0

-2

-4

-6 12345678

-3
x 10

Employment Home

0

-2

-4

-6

-8 12345678

x 10-4

Output Foreign

6

4

2

0

12345678

-4
x 10 8

Consumption Foreign

6

4

2

0 12345678

-4
x 10 10

Employment Foreign

5

0 12345678

Figure 4: Demand shock, aggregate variables I. Solid line: MU benchmark; Circles: Tax policy; Crosses: Transfers

36

-3
x 10 2 1 0 -1 -2
2

4

Transfer / Tax Home 6 8 10 12 14 16

-4
x 10 15

Real Rate Home

10

5

0

12345678

-5
x 10 0

Union Target Rate

-0.5

-1

-1.5 12345678

-4
x 10 2

Transfer / Tax Foreign

1

0

-1

-2 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16

-5
x 10 0

Real Rate Foreign

-5

-10

-15 12345678

-3
x 10 3

Terms of Trade

2

1

0 12345678

Figure 5: Demand shock, aggregate variables II. Solid line: MU benchmark; Circles: Tax policy; Crosses: Transfers

-3
x 10 1

Consumption Ricardian Home

0

-1 1234567 Consumption Rule-of-Thumb Home

-0.005

-0.01

-0.015 1234567

-3
x 10 5 0 -5 -10 -15
1

2

Employment Ricardian Home 3456

7

-3
x 10 3 2 1 0

Employment Rule-of-Thumb Home

-1 1234567

8 8 8 8

-5
x 10 15 10
5 0 -5
1
-3
x 10 2

Consumption Ricardian Foreign
234567 Consumption Rule-of-Thumb Foreign

1

0 1
-4
x 10 20

2

3456 Employment Ricardian Foreign

7

10

0

1234567

-4
x 10 0

Employment Rule-of-Thumb Foreign

-2

-4 1234567

8 8 8 8

Figure 6: Demand shock, disaggregated variables. Solid line: MU benchmark; Circles: Tax policy; Crosses: Transfers

37

-3
x 10

Output Home

4

2

0

-2

-4 12345678

-3
x 10 4

Consumption Home

2

0

-2

-4

-6 12345678

-3
x 10 0

Employment Home

-5

-10

-15 12345678

-4
x 10

Output Foreign

10

5

0

12345678

-4
x 10

Consumption Foreign

15

10

5

0

12345678

-4
x 10 15

Employment Foreign

10

5

0

12345678

Figure 7: TFP shock, aggregate variables I. Solid line: MU benchmark; Circles: Tax policy; Crosses: Transfers

-3
x 10 4

Transfer / Tax Home

2

0

-2

-4 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16

-3
x 10 2.5
2 1.5
1 0.5
0

Real Rate Home

12345678

-4
x 10 0

Union Target Rate

-1

-2

12345678

-4
x 10 4 2

Transfer / Tax Foreign

0

-2

-4 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16

-4
x 10 0

Real Rate Foreign

-1

-2

-3 12345678

-3
x 10

Terms of Trade

4

2

0 12345678

Figure 8: TFP shock, aggregate variables II. Solid line: MU benchmark; Circles: Tax policy; Crosses: Transfers

38

-3
x 10 5

Consumption Ricardian Home

0 1234567

-3
x 10

Consumption Rule-of-Thumb Home

0

-10

-20 1

234567 Employment Ricardian Home

0

-0.01

-0.02

-0.03 1234567

-3
x 10

Employment Rule-of-Thumb Home

4

2

0

1234567

8 8 8 8

-4
x 10

Consumption Ricardian Foreign

4
2
0 1
-3
x 10 3 2 1 0
1
-3
x 10 3 2 1 0
1
-4
x 10 2 0 -2 -4 -6
1

234567 Consumption Rule-of-Thumb Foreign
234567 Employment Ricardian Foreign
234567 Employment Rule-of-Thumb Foreign
234567

8 8 8 8

Figure 9: TFP shock, disaggregated variables. Solid line: MU benchmark; Circles: Tax policy; Crosses: Transfers

39

-3
x 10

Output Home

0

-2

-4

-6

12345678

-3
x 10

Consumption Home

0

-2

-4

-6 12345678

-3
x 10

Employment Home

0

-2

-4

-6

-8 12345678

-3
x 10 0

Taxes to Union Home

-0.5

-1 12345678

x 10-3 1

Output Foreign

0.5

0 12345678

-4
x 10 6

Consumption Foreign

4

2

0 12345678

-4
x 10 10

Employment Foreign

5

0

12345678

-4
x 10 1

Taxes to Union Foreign

0.5

0 12345678

Figure 10: Union-wide public goods versus national public goods. Solid lines: National public goods; Circles: Union-wide public goods.

40

SFB 649 Discussion Paper Series 2013
For a complete list of Discussion Papers published by the SFB 649, please visit http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de.
001 "Functional Data Analysis of Generalized Quantile Regressions" by Mengmeng Guo, Lhan Zhou, Jianhua Z. Huang and Wolfgang Karl Härdle, January 2013.
002 "Statistical properties and stability of ratings in a subset of US firms" by Alexander B. Matthies, January 2013.
003 "Empirical Research on Corporate Credit-Ratings: A Literature Review" by Alexander B. Matthies, January 2013.
004 "Preference for Randomization: Empirical and Experimental Evidence" by Nadja Dwenger, Dorothea Kübler and Georg Weizsäcker, January 2013.
005 "Pricing Rainfall Derivatives at the CME" by Brenda López Cabrera, Martin Odening and Matthias Ritter, January 2013.
006 "Inference for Multi-Dimensional High-Frequency Data: Equivalence of Methods, Central Limit Theorems, and an Application to Conditional Independence Testing" by Markus Bibinger and Per A. Mykland, January 2013.
007 "Crossing Network versus Dealer Market: Unique Equilibrium in the Allocation of Order Flow" by Jutta Dönges, Frank Heinemann and Tijmen R. Daniëls, January 2013.
008 "Forecasting systemic impact in financial networks" by Nikolaus Hautsch, Julia Schaumburg and Melanie Schienle, January 2013.
009 "`I'll do it by myself as I knew it all along': On the failure of hindsightbiased principals to delegate optimally" by David Danz, Frank Hüber, Dorothea Kübler, Lydia Mechtenberg and Julia Schmid, January 2013.
010 "Composite Quantile Regression for the Single-Index Model" by Yan Fan, Wolfgang Karl Härdle, Weining Wang and Lixing Zhu, February 2013.
011 "The Real Consequences of Financial Stress" by Stefan Mittnik and Willi Semmler, February 2013.
012 "Are There Bubbles in the Sterling-dollar Exchange Rate? New Evidence from Sequential ADF Tests" by Timo Bettendorf and Wenjuan Chen, February 2013.
013 "A Transfer Mechanism for a Monetary Union" by Philipp Engler and Simon Voigts, March 2013.
SFB 649, Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

