BERLIN

SFB 6 4 9 E C O N O M I C R I S K

SFB 649 Discussion Paper 2013-025
The `Celtic Crisis': Guarantees, transparency, and systemic liquidity risk
Philipp König* Kartik Anand** Frank Heinemann*
* Technische Universität Berlin, Germany ** Financial Stability Department, Bank of Canada, Ottawa, Canada
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".
http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de ISSN 1860-5664
SFB 649, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin

The `Celtic Crisis': Guarantees, transparency, and systemic liquidity risk
Philipp Königa,, Kartik Anandb, Frank Heinemanna
aTechnische Universität Berlin, Sek. H 52, Straße des 17. Juni 135, 10623 Berlin, Germany bFinancial Stability Department, Bank of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1A 0G9
Abstract
Bank liability guarantee schemes have traditionally been viewed as costless measures to shore up investor confidence and stave off bank runs. However, as the experiences of some European countries, most notably Ireland, have demonstrated, the credibility and effectiveness of these guarantees is crucially intertwined with the sovereign's funding risks. Employing methods from the literature on global games, we develop a simple model to explore the systemic linkage between the rollover risks of a bank and a government, which are connected through the government's guarantee of bank liabilities. We show the existence and uniqueness of the joint equilibrium and derive its comparative static properties. In solving for the optimal guarantee numerically, we show how its credibility may be improved through policies that promote balance sheet transparency. We explain the asymmetry in risk-transfer between sovereign and banking sector, following the introduction of a guarantee as being attributed to the resolution of strategic uncertainties held by bank depositors and the opacity of the banks' balance sheets.
Keywords: bank debt guarantees, transparency, bank default, sovereign default, global games JEL classification codes: G01, G28, D89
1. Introduction
Following the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, a great many, in particular European, countries issued sizable bank debt guarantee programs. In this paper we analyze the conditions conducive for the success of such schemes. We address this issue by answering several smaller, but more tractable questions. First, how does a government's issuance of a banking sector liability guarantee scheme influence the behavior of sovereign and bank creditors to continue lending? Second, what is the impact of the guarantee on the ex ante probabilities of banking and sovereign default, as well as on the likelihood of a systemic crisis? Third, is there a guarantee that optimally trades off the risk of sovereign and bank default? And finally, how does the effectiveness of the (optimal) guarantee depend on balance sheet transparency and on the liquidity of banks and sovereigns alike?
$The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not represent the official views of the Bank of Canada. The authors acknowledge support from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the Collaborative Research Center (Sonderforschungsbereich) SFB 649 on "Economic Risk". We thank Flora Budianto, Miles Rimasch and Liting Zhao for help with the data. Christian Basteck provided valuable comments and suggestions. All remaining errors are our own.
Corresponding author: philipp.koenig@tu-berlin.de.
1

The global financial crisis was marked by a severe loss of confidence by investors in financial markets all over the world. The triggers were revelations of losses on US sub­ prime mortgages and other toxic financial assets by banks. An immediate consequence was a freeze in interbank money markets, as banks ceased lending to each other.1 Figure 1(a) illustrates this development. It shows the EURIBOR-OIS spread, a measure for interbank market tensions in the euro area, sharply and abruptly increasing three-fold following the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008. Figure 1(c) shows the changes in the spreads for banking sector and sovereign Credit Default Swaps (CDSs), between January 2007 and late September 2008 (shortly after the default of Lehman Brothers). Viewed as proxies for the probabilities of default of banks, we note a marked increase in the fragility of banking sector in several countries.
In light of such deteriorating conditions, governments sought to introduce measures to shore up confidence in their domestic financial sectors. For many, especially European countries, this included introducing contingent guarantee schemes for retail and wholesale bank deposits. These schemes were viewed as cost effective measures to stave off bank runs, whereby governments lend their own creditworthiness to the financial sector.2 Table A1 provides a brief overview of schemes introduced in several countries. Figure 1(b) compares the sizes of schemes introduced in several countries, relative to their GDP. The schemes in Italy and Spain amounted to about 3% and 9% of GDP, respectively, while in Austria and the Netherlands they totaled at, roughly, 30% of GDP. All these were, however, dwarfed by the measures introduced in Ireland, wherein the state guaranteed all bank liabilities for a period of two years with no monetary cap. The broad mandate of the Irish scheme, which amounted to roughly 244% of GDP, followed from the consensus that, as Patrick Honohan (2010), governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, noted, "No Irish bank should be allowed to fail".
In general, the guarantee schemes were successful in alleviating banking sector default risk, yet, at the same time, they led to an increase in sovereign default risk. This can be seen from Figure 1(d) which compares the change in sovereign CDS­spreads with the change in banking sector CDSs. Based on this measure, it appears that the increase in the sovereigns' default probabilities was of much smaller magnitude than the reduction in the respective banking sector default probability. This phenomenon indicates that the guarantees not only led to a re­allocation of risks between banks and governments, but they may have also reduced economy­wide risks.
The case of Ireland requires particular attention, as it can be considered exemplary for the dramatic, and systemic consequences that may follow from tying the government's funding situation to that of its banking sector by means of debt guarantees. Prior to the crisis, the Irish economy was considered `sound', with low government debt and deficit, prospects for growth, and low sovereign funding costs (see Panel (e)). Against this background, Ireland issued its first bank liability guarantee program in October 2008. The guarantee had the immediate effect of driving down CDS­spreads for the banking sector. However, as concerns pertaining to the guarantee's credibility, and the Irish government's ability to pay out the guarantee, were it to come due, spread through sovereign creditors, Ireland's funding costs skyrocketed. Moreover, the guarantee failed to prevent large withdrawals away from Irish banks to the perceived safe havens like Germany, the Netherlands or Luxemburg. Figure 1(f) illustrates this trend with the net TARGET2 lia-
1See Taylor and Williams (2008) or Holthausen and Pill (2010) for a detailed investigation of interbank money markets during the 2007­08 financial crisis.
2See Schich and Kim (2011) for an overview of banking sector safety nets.
2

Figure 1: Stylized Facts

BPS BPS BPS

150

100

50

0 2007

2008

LB 2009

2010

2011

:Panel (a) Time series of the 3 month Euribor-OIS spreads in basis points.
The marker `LB' indicates the date that Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy
(September 15, 2008). Data taken from Bloomberg.

400

300

200 Banking Sector Sovereign
100

0
IT ES PT BE FR DE UK AT NL IE DK SE
:Panel (c) Change in CDS­spreads for banks and sovereigns between 1/1/2007 and
9/25/2008. Bank CDSs are unweighted averages of banks with headquarter in respective country. Data from Bloomberg.

Size of Guarantee as of GDP

250
200
150
100
50
0 IT ES PT FR DE UK AT NL DK SE IE
:Panel (b) Guarantee sizes in % of GDP. Data taken from OECD.

50
0 IT ES PT BE FR DE UK AT NL IE DK SE
50
100
150
200

Banking Sector Sovereign

BPS

:Panel (d) Change in CDS­spreads for banks and sovereigns between
9/26/2008 and 10/21/2008. Bank CDSs are unweighted averages of banks with
headquarter in respective country. Data from Bloomberg.

600 500

400 2Y Spread
300 10Y Spread
200

100

0 2007

2008

G 2009

2010

EU IMF

:Panel (e) Irish spreads over German bund, in basis points. The marker `G'
indicates the date that the Irish government introduced the guarantee scheme,
while `EU-IMF' gives the date that the joint European Union and International
Monetary Fund bailout for Ireland was announced. Data from Bloomberg.

300

Bn Euros

200 DE
100 LU
0 IE
100

2007

2008

2009

2010

:Panel (f) Net TARGET2 Liabilities of selected euro area national central
banks against the Eurosystem in millions of euro. Negative values reflect a
Target2-liability, positive numbers a Target2-asset. Data taken from University
of Osnabrück's Euro Crisis Monitor.

3

bilities of the Irish Central Bank, which serves as a proxy for the cumulative net outflows of euro denominated liquidity.3 The systemic events culminated in the nationalization of Anglo-Irish Bank in January 2009, and the Irish government seeking a bail-out on 21 November, 2010, jointly from the European Union's European Financial Stability Facility and the International Monetary Fund.
The `Celtic crisis' is far removed from what governments would hope to achieve by issuing bank debt guarantee schemes. The resulting systemic crisis was a direct consequence of the false belief that a guarantee will shore up investor confidence, without placing any strain on a government's own funding needs, and hence, on the credibility in keeping its guarantee promises. Or, as one financial market participant bluntly put it to the Wall Street Journal (2011) when asked to comment on the on-going banking sector problems in the euro area, "How useful would bank guarantees from member states be if these member states are themselves shut out of financial markets?".
In this paper we present a simple model of a systemic liquidity crisis consisting of a government, one bank and a large pool of bank and sovereign creditors. Bank creditors must decide whether to rollover their loans to the bank or to withdraw. Their decisions depend on the bank's recourse to liquidity and the contingent guarantee provided for by the government. Sovereign creditors, in turn, decide on whether to continue lending to the government or to withdraw. The decisions of sovereign creditors depend on the government's available resources and the possible payment of the bank guarantee. Using standard techniques from the literature on global games, we embed our model in an incomplete information setting, where creditors face strategic uncertainty concerning the actions of other creditors, as well as fundamental uncertainty over the bank's and the government's recourse to liquidity. Following well established lines of reasoning, we show that our model exhibits a unique equilibrium in threshold strategies, and that there are no other equilibria in non-threshold strategies.
Our model displays strategic complementarities within each group of creditors. That is, the incentives of individual bank (sovereign) creditors to rollover are increasing in the mass of bank (sovereign) creditors who also rollover. Furthermore, bank creditors' incentives to rollover are also increasing in the mass of sovereign creditors who lend to the government. Hence, sovereign creditors' actions are strategic complements for bank creditors. But the converse does not hold. The incentives of a sovereign creditor to lend are decreasing in the mass of bank creditors who rollover. The actions of bank creditors are therefore strategic substitutes for sovereign creditors. To better understand the latter property, suppose that, following the introduction of a guarantee, a large fraction of bank creditors rollover their loans. However, where the bank to still fail, a large guarantee payout would come due which would add to the government's liabilities. Anticipating such an outcome, sovereign creditors would become doubtful about the government's liquidity and more reluctant to rollover their own claims. This property of our model must be interpreted with caution and against the background of the questions that we address. Although the government in the model wishes to avoid a bank default, we abstract away from direct payments being made by the bank to the government. If, for example, the government could collect taxes from the bank, its liquidity situation would be directly
3While the Irish guarantee scheme was introduced in October 2008, the outflows continued until May 2009, when they peaked at approximately e100 billion. While there was a reversal of trends between May and September 2009, the pace of withdrawals accelerated shortly thereafter and continued through 2010, and peaking only in January 2011. See Bindseil and König (2012) for details on the role and mechanics of the TARGET2 system during the financial crisis.
4

intertwined with the bank and the strategic substitutes effect would be less pronounced. However, since such taxes may distort the incentives of the bank to act with prudence and remain solvent, we abstract from their inclusion in order to derive the 'pure' strategic interactions between the different groups of creditors.
Finally, using numerical methods we investigate how the optimal guarantee size, and the welfare properties it induces, relate to the underlying model parameters. The optimal guarantee is obtained by minimizing a cost of crisis function, which is a weighted sum of the output losses attributed to individual bank and government defaults, and the systemic crisis. Increases in the ex ante expected recourse to liquidity, for both the bank and government, lead to larger guarantees. We also find that policies that promote bank's balance sheet transparency are welfare enhancing. These gains are further improved with added balance sheet transparency of the government. We also put forward an explanation for why the reduction in banking sector CDS spreads, following the introduction of guarantee schemes, was often larger, in absolute magnitude, than the accompanying increase in sovereign CDS spreads. We argue that the strong reduction in banking sector CDSs may have been due to the guarantee's effect of removing strategic uncertainty among bank creditors, while the higher sovereign CDSs are attributed to the opacity on bank's balance sheets.
The paper is structured as follows. We introduce the canonical bank debt rollover model in Section 3. In Section 4 we introduce the government responsible for managing the guarantee scheme, but is itself subject to rollover risk from a set of sovereign creditors. The comparative statics properties of this extended model are provided in Section 5. In Section 6 we present numerical results for the effects of transparency in a calibrated exercises, and a final section concludes. Most of the mathematics and all proofs are deferred to the Appendix.
2. Relation to the Literature
The modern theoretical perspective on banks' maturity and liquidity mismatches, and deposit guarantees is based on the seminal model of Diamond and Dybvig (1983). They show the existence of multiple, self-fulfilling equilibria for a bank with short-term financed illiquid assets. In one equilibrium, the bank is run by all depositors and fails as its liquid reserves are not sufficient to cover depositors' aggregate claims. In the second equilibrium only a small amount of withdrawals occurs and the bank's liquidity is sufficient to avoid default. The two equilibria are brought about by a mis-coordination of beliefs. Deposit insurance, which is financed by taxes, helps to overcome this multiplicity by increasing depositors' expected payoffs from rolling over. The mere existence of such a deposit insurance is sufficient to coordinate creditors on the efficient equilibrium and to avoid a bank run. In equilibrium, the insurance is never paid out.
Morris and Shin (2000) and Goldstein and Pauzner (2005) solve the multiple equilibria problem by extending the setup of Diamond and Dybvig to an incomplete information setting where information on the liquidity of the bank, is not common knowledge. By employing the global games approach of Morris and Shin (1998, 2003) they solve for the unique equilibrium in threshold strategies. If the information received by depositors is sufficiently precise and banks' fundamentals are below a critical threshold, most depositors withdraw, thus causing the bank's failure. If liquidity is sufficiently strong, then depositors stay. Importantly, in equilibrium the amount actually paid out due to the deposit guarantee is low as there are only a few depositors who roll over despite the bank's default. This logic has recently been translated to government guarantee schemes by Kasahara (2009) and Bebchuk and Goldstein (2010). Kasahara considers a standard
5

global game model, where creditors to a firm enjoy the benefit of a government-financed debt guarantee. He shows that the guarantee removes inefficient coordination failures only if the government combines this policy with an information policy where it provides a sufficiently precise public signal about the firm's fundamental. While the guarantee in Kasahara's model is exogenously financed, he also considers potential costs that may arise when the guarantee creates adverse incentives and leads to a moral hazard problem on the side of the firm.
Bebchuk and Goldstein (2010) consider a stylized global game model where the coordination failure occurs among banks who can decide whether to lend to the real economy or not. Among other policy measures, they consider how a guarantee of banks' loans could overcome the no-lending- or `credit-freeze-equilibrium'. Similar to the effect of a deposit insurance in a bank-run model, they find that when the guarantee is sufficiently high, the risk of coordination failure may be reduced to zero. Goldstein and Bebchuk focus especially on the `global game solution' of vanishing fundamental uncertainty and they conclude that "(...) government's guarantees (...) do not lead to any capital being spent (...) this mechanism leads to an improvement in the threshold below which a credit freeze occurs without any actual cost" (p. 25). The authors nevertheless acknowledge that the validity of a guarantee mechanism crucially "depends on the credibility of the government in providing the guarantee" (p. 26). Our model adds to this recent literature by explicitly considering the credibility of the guarantee by adding a refinancing problem for the sovereign guarantor. As will be explained in greater detail below, Goldstein's and Bebchuk's conclusion still hold in our model whenever fundamental uncertainty vanishes. Yet, whenever bank creditors face some fundamental uncertainty, the guarantee leads to a higher default risk of the sovereign.
Cooper (2012) shows a similar result in a multiple equilibrium model of sovereign debt pricing. He studies how a guarantee by a sound country shifts strategic uncertainty towards the guarantor. In the absence of fundamental uncertainty, beliefs of creditors are not affected and the guarantee simply acts as a device that selects the good equilibrium. Yet, when fundamental uncertainty is present, the guarantee may influence the price of the sound country's debt. The guarantee then connects the countries and creates a contagion channel which was not present before.
Acharya et al. (2011) consider the related problem of financial sector bailouts and their impact on sovereign credit risk. Bank bailouts are financed by taxing the nonfinancial sector of the economy. While the bailout is successful in alleviating problems of the banks, the higher tax burden of the non-financial sector reduces the economy's growth rate. The government's task is thus to optimize the economy's welfare and to set the optimal tax rate. We abstract in this paper from taxation and finely focus on the coordination problem between bank and sovereign creditors. This emphasis on joint coordination failures allows us to address more clearly the issues of the governments' "ability-to-pay" and the credibility of the guarantee. The government in our model then sets the optimal guarantee in order to minimize the expected costs of crises and coordination failures.
Closely related to our model is the `twin crises' global game of Goldstein (2005), which also includes two groups of agents, currency speculators who attack a pegged exchange rate, and bank creditors who hold foreign currency denominated claims against a domestic bank. The (exogenous) political decision by a government to peg the exchange rate connects the actions of the two groups of agents. The greater the fraction of speculators who attack the currency, the more likely a devaluation of the currency becomes, and hence the more likely is the bank to default due to the currency mis-match on its balance sheet. Conversely, the greater the fraction of bank creditors who withdraw their funds,
6

the larger is the outflow of foreign reserves, and it becomes more likely that the currency peg will break down. The actions of bank creditors and speculators are strategic complements. They reinforce each other which gives rise to a vicious circle. In our model it is also an exogenous political decision, guaranteeing bank debt, that leads to the connection of the actions of sovereign and banking creditors. But in contrast to Goldstein's twin crisis theory, only the actions of sovereign creditors are strategic complements for bank creditors, while bank creditors' actions are strategic substitutes for sovereign creditors. Moreover, in Goldstein's model, the bank's and the sovereign's financial strength is determined by the same fundamental, whilst the financial strength of the respective institutions in our model is driven by different, independently distributed fundamentals.
Global games with different fundamentals have not yet been studied in the literature to a great extent. Two examples related to our paper are Dasgupta (2004) and Manz (2010). Dasgupta models financial contagion in a global game between two banks in different regions that are exposed to independent regional shocks. Linkages between banks are created by cross-holdings of deposits in the interbank market and regional shocks may, therefore, trigger contagious bank failures in equilibrium. Manz also considers a global game with two independently distributed fundamentals to study informationbased contagion between distinct sets of creditors of two firms. Creditors have imperfect information about both, their debtor firm's fundamental and a common hurdle function which a fundamental must pass for the respective firm to become solvent. In contrast to Dasgupta, his model has a sequential structure where creditors to the second firm can observe whether the first firm failed or not. This observation acts like a common signal and provides second firm creditors some information about the hurdle which in turn influences their decision to liquidate their own claim or not. While we also resort to the assumption of independently distributed fundamentals, creditor decisions are taken simultaneously, which implies that informational contagion, based on the observation of a particular outcome in one refinancing game, cannot occur. Rather, the spill-overs between the bank's and the sovereign's refinancing problem are determined by the guarantee.
3. Canonical bank debt rollover game
In this section, we describe the canonical rollover game that serves as the workhorse for the remainder of the paper. We introduce an exogenously financed guarantee and discuss the relationship between balance sheet transparency and the costliness of the guarantee.
3.1. Model description
A bank, indexed b, is indebted to risk-neutral creditors nb  [0, Nb], where Nb  R+ measures the bank's exposure to funding illiquidity. Creditors hold identical claims against the bank with face value of one monetary unit. The bank's recourse to cash is summarized by the random variable b  U[-b, b + b0]. The ex-ante mean recourse to liquidity is given by b0/2. We may think of b as being comprised of two parts. First, there are the liquid assets (cash) on the bank's balance sheet, which directly contribute to increasing b. Second, the bank can raise cash by entering into secured finance arrangements ­ for example, repurchase agreements and covered bonds ­ where it pledges illiquid assets to investors in exchange for cash. These investors, who are not explicitly modeled, include other commercial banks, hedge funds, and also the central bank.
Creditors simultaneously decide whether to rollover their loans to the bank, or to withdraw. We express the set of actions for a typical bank creditor by {0, 1}, where 0
7

denotes rolling over, while 1 denotes withdrawing. Defining b  [0, 1] as the fraction of bank creditors who withdraw, the bank defaults whenever aggregate withdrawals exceed

the available liquid resources,

b Nb  b.

(1)

We assume that all bank creditors have common payoffs, which are summarized in Table 2. Withdrawal by a creditor may entail additional transaction costs, which are subtracted

Bank Creditor

Withdraw Rollover

Bank Default Survive
Cb Cb Db

Table 2: Typical bank creditor's payoffs.
from the unit claim held against the bank. Thus, the net payoff from withdrawing is Cb  1, which is independent of whether the bank defaults or survives.4 If, however, the creditor rolls over his loan and the bank survives, he is paid back Db > 1, which includes both the original amount lent, plus additional interest payments. Finally, if the bank defaults, then creditors who rolled over their loans receive a fraction of their unit claim. We interpret as the payment stemming from a bank liability guarantee scheme. In what follows, we assume that is exogenously financed and that creditors receive the amount whenever it comes due. We further assume that Db > Cb   0, which entails that creditors face a coordination problem.5
3.2. Tripartite classification of the fundamental
The bank debt rollover game exhibits a tripartite classification of the fundamental b, which is a characteristic of such coordination games.6 For b < 0, the bank always
4The fact that creditors always receive Cb when they choose to foreclose deserves some comment. The interpretation of b as available liquid resources implies that the bank is unable to pay one unit per claimant for b < ^b. A more plausible setup would then be to impose a `sequential service constraint' and assume that creditors receive only a fraction of the available resources in the case of bank default, which may be determined by b, the fraction b and possible transaction costs. The resulting payoff from withdrawing would inherit a negative dependency on b. However, the realism added by modeling the problem in this way has to be traded off against technical difficulties that arise due to the resulting partial strategic complementarities. The proof of equilibrium employed above relies on the existence of global strategic complementarities, i.e. creditors' actions strictly decrease in b. But with the more realistic assumption of a `sequential service constraint', the expected payoff differential (rolling over vs withdrawing) becomes increasing in b over a certain range. However, as Goldstein and Pauzner (2005) show, under the alternative assumption of the payoff differential obeying a single-crossing property, the nature of the equilibrium remains unaltered. There is still a unique symmetric threshold equilibrium. Under the further restriction to uniform distributions, there are also no other non-threshold equilibria. However, this proof is more involved, leading to more complicated comparative statics calculations that continue to remain qualitatively the same. Thus, to keep the model tractable, we stick to the less realistic assumption that the payoff from withdrawing is fully safe which guarantees the global strategic complementarity property. This is also in line with standard practice in the literature, e.g. Chui et al. (2002) or Morris and Shin (2006). Rochet and Vives (2004) further motivate this approach by appealing to institutional managers who seek to make the right decision, while their payoffs do not depend directly on the face value of their claims.
5For simplicity, we deliberately ignore the possibility of default due to insolvency at some later date which may occur even though the rollover has been successfully managed.
6See e.g. Diamond and Dybvig (1983), in the context of bank-runs, and Obstfeld (1996) in the context of currency crises.
8

defaults, irrespective of the fraction b of creditors who foreclose. We refer to this as the fundamental insolvency case or the efficient default. It is a dominant action for creditors to withdraw in this case. For b > Nb, the bank always survives, even if all creditors were to foreclose their loans. Here it is dominant for all creditors to rollover their loans.
If b < 0, there exists a unique Nash­equilibrium where all creditors withdraw and the bank defaults. For b > Nb, there is a unique Nash­equilibrium where all creditors rollover their loans and the bank survives. However, under the assumptions of common knowledge of b, the game exhibits multiple equilibria ­ in pure strategies ­ for intermediate values b  [0, Nb]. The equilibria in this interval are sustained by common self-fulfilling expectations about the behavior of other creditors. In one equilibrium, each creditor expects that all other creditors will withdraw, and hence withdrawing is the best response to this belief. In aggregate, this leads to the bank's default, which validates the initially held beliefs. In the second equilibrium, each creditor expects all other creditors to rollover their loans. This implies that each creditor chooses to rollover as the best response to this belief. The resulting outcome is one where the bank survives, which once again vindicates the beliefs of creditors.7
3.3. Information structure and strategies
To eliminate the multiplicity of equilibria we use the global games approach and relax the assumption of common knowledge about b. This is replaced by a weaker assumption that creditors have heterogeneous and imperfect information concerning the bank's fundamental. Specifically, creditors receive private signals about the fundamental before choosing their action. The signals are modeled as xnb = b + nb , where nb is an idiosyncratic i.i.d. noise term uniformly distributed over the support [-b, b]. Following the literature on transparency, i.e., Heinemann and Illing (2002), Bannier and Heinemann (2005), and Lindner (2006), we interpret b as the degree of balance sheet transparency in the banking sector. When b is small there is a high degree of transparency, as the signals that bank creditors receive enable them to better infer the true fundamental from their observed signals. Creditors use their private signals and the commonly known prior to form individual posteriors b|xnb by means of Bayesian updating. Furthermore, to apply global game methods, we need to ensure that the support of the fundamental distribution is sufficiently large to include an upper and a lower dominance region.8
A strategy for a typical creditor is a complete plan of action that determines for each realization of the signal whether the creditor rolls over or withdraws. Formally, a strategy is a mapping snb : xnb  {0, 1}. Strategies are symmetric if snb (·) = sb(·) for all nb. A strategy is called a threshold strategy if a creditor chooses to withdraw for all xnb below some critical x^nb and rolls over otherwise. Finally, a symmetric threshold strategy is a threshold strategy where all creditors use the same critical x^b.
7See Morris and Shin (2003). 8Given the support of the signal error, a creditor knows for sure that the bank will default whenever he receives a signal xnb < -b (even if all other creditors roll over). And similarly, whenever he receives a signal xnb > Nb +b, he knows for sure that the bank will survive (even if all other creditors withdraw). We assume that the support of b is sufficiently large to include states where all creditors find either rolling over or withdrawing dominant, i.e.
[-2b, Nb + 2b]  [-b, b0 + b].
9

3.4. Equilibrium A symmetric equilibrium of the bank debt rollover game, with heterogeneous informa-
tion, is given by the strategy sb(·) and aggregate choice (b) such that creditors maximize their expected payoffs and
1 b+b b(b) = 2b b-b sb(xnb )d xnb .
It is a well established result that coordination games, like our bank debt rollover game, exhibit a unique equilibrium in symmetric threshold strategies.9 The following proposition re-states this result in terms of our model.

Proposition 1. The bank debt rollover game has a unique equilibrium summarized by

the tuple (x^b, ^b) where

x^b = ^b + 2b

^b

1 -

Nb 2

(2)

and

^b

=

Nb (Cb - Db -

) .

(3)

Creditors with signals xnb withdraw if xnb < x^b and rollover if xnb > x^b. The bank defaults if and only if b < ^b.

Proof. See Morris and Shin (2003) for the proof of existence and uniqueness and the Appendix for the calculations of Equations (2) and (3).

3.5. Changes to the guarantee size

Albeit stylized, we interpret as the payment from a bank liability guarantee scheme

provided by the government. Creditors receive in the event that they rollover their

loans and the bank defaults. If creditors choose to withdraw their loans, they always

receive Cb. In absence of the guarantee, i.e. = 0, bank creditors will choose to rollover their loans as long as the probability attached to the bank's survival is sufficiently high.

In terms of the payoffs, they will rollover as long as the spread between Db and Cb is large enough to compensate for incurring the risk of ending up with a zero payoff in case

of bank default. A positive guarantee > 0 reduces the opportunity cost of rolling over

(given by Cb - ) and therefore increases creditors' incentives to rollover. All other things equal, a larger guarantee lowers the critical thresholds ^b and x^b, and leads to a higher

ex ante survival probability,

^b 

=

Nb (Cb - Db) (Db - )2

<

0.

3.6. Transparency and expected costs of a guarantee
Such comparative static results and conclusions may have contributed to the widely held perception that bank liability guarantee schemes are a costless measure to shore up confidence in financial institutions. And while it is true, that the guarantee serves as a device to change the incentives of creditors to coordinate on the efficient equilibrium, the

9See Morris and Shin (2003). For a general class of distributions of the fundamental other than the uniform distribution, uniqueness requires that the private signals of creditors are sufficiently precise, i.e. b to be sufficiently small.

10

question remains whether this is indeed a costless policy. To better appreciate the con-
ditions under which this holds true, consider the case where creditors face only strategic
uncertainty about the behavior of other creditors and no fundamental uncertainty about
the true realization of b. This corresponds to a high degree of balance sheet transparency with b  0, which implies that x^b  ^b. All creditors now receive almost the same signal and as they all use the same threshold strategy around x^b, in equilibrium, either everyone rolls over and the bank survives or everyone forecloses and the bank de-
faults. The payoffs to the creditors are either Db, if everyone rolls over their loans, or Cb if they all withdraw. While the guarantee payment raises the creditors' incentives to rollover, it is never paid out. A policymaker could therefore issue an arbitrarily large
guarantee and effectively control the likelihood of default without ever having to follow
up on its promises. In particular, by setting = Cb, the bank's failure threshold converges to ^b = 0 such that only a fundamentally insolvent bank defaults. By making such a choice, a policy maker can exclude inefficient bank runs due to coordination failures.10
The result, that guarantees are costless, changes, however, with a lower degree of
balance sheet transparency and creditors facing fundamental uncertainty, i.e. b > 0. In this case, some creditors may decide to rollover their loans due to `misleading' signals xnb > x^b, even though b < ^b and the bank defaults. These creditors become benefactors of the guarantee scheme and receive . Denote by b the fraction of agents who receive the guarantee payment. By the law of large numbers, b equals the probability that a single signal xnb is above x^b conditional on the realized b i.e.,



0



(b

,

x^ b

,

^b

)

=



b

-x^ b +b 2b



0

if b > ^b if x^b - b < b < ^b
if b < x^b - b

(4)

Figure 1 plots b and b against the fundamental b for the cases of full balance sheet transparency, b = 0, (dashed lines) and with lower transparency, b > 0 (solid lines).
In the case of full transparency, b is a step function with a jump discontinuity at ^b, while b is always equal to 0. With lower transparency, however, b decreases linearly from 1 to 0 over the range [x^b - b, x^b + b], while b increases linearly in b from 0 to (^b - x^b +b)/2b, over the range [x^b -b, ^b]. This illustrates the potential costs stemming from the guarantee scheme. The ex ante expected fraction of agents who benefit from the guarantee, and hence expected costs, are decreasing in the degree of balance sheet transparency. When balance sheet transparency is rather low, creditors' information is widely dispersed and many creditors may erroneously believe that the bank may not default even if, in fact, it does. These creditors, in turn, become eligible for the guarantee payment.
Several vital questions arise from these considerations. To which extent do the costs stemming from the guarantee pose a threat to the guarantor's own solvency or liquidity position? Are guarantees still effective in reducing the likelihood of bank default whenever one takes the funding risk of the guarantor into account? What are the effects of variations in bank and guarantor liquidity parameters on the behavior of creditors? In what follows, we answer these questions by explicitly modeling the guarantor's, i.e. the government's, funding risks.

10Such a policy has its counterpart in the lender-of-last-resort policy of many major central banks that follow Bagehot's rule and grant liquidity and emergency assistance only against eligible collateral to banks that are considered as "sound" by the supervising regulatory authorities.

11

b 1

b b 1

1 2

x^ b - b

x^b ^b = x^b

x^ b + b

b

Figure 1: Upper diagram: Fraction of bank creditors who withdraw, b. Lower diagram: Fraction of

bank creditors who receive guarantee payment, b. The case b = 0 is represented by the dotted lines,

whereas the case b > 0 is represented by solid lines. An increase in b does not affect ^b, but it changes x^b

to

x^ b .

The

diagram

is

drawn

under

the

assumption

that

Cb- Db-

<

1 2

so

that

x^ b

< ^b

if

b > 0.

4. Bank debt rollover game in the face of sovereign funding risk
4.1. Model description
Building on the canonical bank debt rollover model we now explicitly introduce the refinancing problem of the government that issued the guarantee. In case of bank default, the government pays out to those bank creditors that rolled over their loans. However, the government is itself facing a rollover game involving a set of sovereign creditors ng  [0, Ng] who are all different from the bank's creditors. We normalize the mass of sovereign creditors to unity, Ng  1. Each sovereign creditor holds a claim with a face value of one monetary unit against the government. Sovereign creditors decide simultaneously whether to continue lending to the government, or to withdraw. The government defaults whenever its liquid resources are insufficient to service debt foreclosures and guarantee payments. We represent the government's liquidity by the random variable g, which is uniformly distributed over [-g, 0g + g], where 0g/2 is the ex-ante mean recourse to liquidity. Moreover, with respect to the relation between b and g we impose the following
Assumption: The government's liquidity, g, and the bank's liquidity, b, are independently distributed.
Sovereign creditors receive noisy signals xng = g + ng concerning the government's liquidity g, where ng is a uniform i.i.d. random variable, with support [-g, g]. As in the banking game, reduced information dispersion, i.e. a lower g is associated with a higher degree of transparency of the government. By assumption, the signals of bank and sovereign creditors are completely uninformative about the fundamental of the respective other entity.
Table 4 gives the payoffs in the sovereign rollover game. A sovereign creditor who withdraws early receives Cg < 1 which is the unit claim, less potential transaction costs. If the government survives, creditors who rolled over their loans receive D g. If the government defaults, the sovereign creditors who rolled over get a zero payoff as there is no

12

Sovereign Creditor

Withdraw Rollover

Government Default Survive
Cg Cg 0 Dg

Table 3: Typical sovereign creditor's payoffs.

guarantee in place for them. The bank's creditors, however, continue to enjoy the benefit of a guarantee in case the
bank defaults and the government survives. The payoffs for a typical bank creditor are shown in Table 4 where we have normalized Cb = 1 in order to reflect the relatively small transaction costs in bank funding markets.

Bank Creditor

Withdraw Rollover

Bank Default

Govt Survive Govt Default

Cb = 1

Cb = 1 0

Bank Survive
Cb = 1 Db

Table 4: Updated bank creditor's payoffs.
As our assumption of independence between sovereign and banking sector liquidity appears restrictive, some comments are in order.
· Firstly, the assumption should be judged against the clear but narrow objective of our paper, namely that we want to demonstrate how, and to what extent, the introduction of a guarantee induces a dependency between the refinancing situation of sovereign and banking sector. For example, it is by now widely known that some euro area members got stuck in a `diabolic loop' where problems in the banking sector and problems of the sovereign tend to amplify each other. One casual explanation for the high exposure of sovereigns vis­a­vis their banking sectors that is usually put forth is that governments, through the issuance of guarantees, linked their own funding situation with that of the bank.11 Yet this implies that the observed correlation has been caused, among other things, by governments issuing guarantees. It was not necessarily present before the introduction of guarantees. From this perspective, our objective in this paper is to provide analytical underpinnings to this side of the diabolic loop. The simplest setting for such an analysis is one where, absent the guarantee, no dependency between the two coordination games exists.
· Secondly, as our focus is on liquidity crises, one can argue that the correlation between the banking sector's liquidity and that of its government is rather low. Indeed, the liquidity of the government is essentially determined by its revenues from taxes, public dues and tariffs. In contrast, as Shin (2012) notes, internationally active banks may tap domestic as well as international markets and can issue a greater variety of financial instruments. Moreover, if banks have branches in other countries, there may be intra-banking group liquidity transactions, so that

11See e.g. DIW (2012).

13

the bank's liquidity may depend on the economic fundamentals in those countries as well. Consequentially, the liquidity situation of banks need not be strongly correlated with the liquidity situation of their resident government. Figure A2 illustrates this for the case of Ireland. The top panel of Figure A2 plots foreign claims of Irish banks on banks in other countries against the Irish government's revenue, both as fractions of Irish GDP. As can be readily gleaned, the linear correlation between the time-series is low. The bottom panel of Figure A2 shows claims of banks in foreign countries on Irish banks against the Irish government's revenue, expressed relative to Irish GDP. Once again, the linear correlation between the series is close to zero. The claims of, and on Irish banks serve as a proxy for b, while government revenue captures g. As such, Figure A2 provides some evidence in favor of our independence assumption.
· Finally, on purely technical grounds, the assumption of independence allows us to devise a simple proof for the existence of a unique equilibrium in threshold strategies and the non-existence of equilibria in other strategies. The intuition behind this result is straightforward. Assumption 1 implies that a bank (sovereign) creditor's signal is only informative about the liquidity situation of the bank (sovereign), but completely uninformative about the liquidity of the sovereign (bank). We can therefore treat the behavior of sovereign creditors in the bank rollover game, respectively the bank creditors in the sovereign game, as exogenously given. Hence, given any arbitrary strategy used by creditors in the other group, each rollover game has a unique equilibrium in threshold strategies. The following Proposition summarizes this result.
Proposition 2. There exists a unique equilibrium where sovereign and bank creditors use threshold strategies. There are no other equilibria in non-threshold strategies.
Proof. See Appendix.
As a consequence of Proposition 2 we restrict our attention to threshold strategies for sovereign and bank creditors. Absent a guarantee, = 0, the two rollover problems are independent of each other and the critical thresholds for the government and the bank can be calculated from the respective formulae in Proposition 1. However, once the government issues a guarantee > 0, its refinancing problem becomes tied to the bank's rollover problem. For states of the world where the bank defaults, the government faces additional costs due to the guarantee payout. This alters the critical threshold for sovereign creditors, which in turn changes the government's default point in all states of the world, even in those where the bank survives. Moreover, the possibility that the government may default changes the critical threshold of bank creditors and thus the bank's default point.
We now turn to an explicit derivation of the threshold equilibrium. Firstly, we solve for the bank's and the government's default conditions. Secondly, we exploit indifference of agents at the threshold signal to characterize the equilibrium.
4.2. Bank and sovereign default conditions The possibility of government default does not alter the bank's failure condition,
which remains b Nb > b. Suppose that bank creditors use a threshold strategy around x^b. From Equation (2), we obtain that the bank's default point, ^b, can be written as a
14

function of the critical threshold signal x^b as

^ b (x^ b )

=

1

x^ b + b + 2b Nb-1

.

(5)

Thus, the bank fails if and only if b < ^b(x^b).

In calculating the government's failure point we must distinguish between two cases.

First, if b > ^b, the bank survives, and the government does not payout the guarantee.

Assuming that government creditors use a symmetric threshold strategy around x^ g, the

government defaults whenever g > g, where g is the fraction of sovereign creditors

whose signals are below x^ g. The government's failure point is calculated as the solution to ^ g = g(^ g), yielding

^ g

=

x^ g + g 1 + 2g

.

Second, suppose b < ^b and the bank defaults. The government is obliged to pay to each bank creditor who rolled over their loan. Since bank creditors use the thresh-

old strategy around x^b, we can use Equation (4) to calculate total guarantee payments, conditional on the realized b, as

Nb



b, x^b, ^b

b < ^b

=

Nb 2b

b +b
du.
x^ b

The government's failure point in case of a bank default then follows by solving

^ g -

Nb 2b

b+b du = g(^ g)
x^ b

yielding

^ g

=

x^ g + g 1 + 2g

+

g b

Nb (b + b - x^b) . 1 + 2g

Taken together, the government's failure point is

 x^ g+g

^ g(x^ g,

x^b, b)

=

 1+2g
x^ g+g
 1+2g

+

b

Nbg (1+2g

)

(b

+

b

-

x^ b )

if b  ^b(x^b) if b < ^b(x^b)

The government defaults if and only if g < ^g(x^ g, x^b, b).

(6)

4.3. Creditors' expected payoffs
Given the default points of bank and government, we now turn to the differences in
expected payoffs for typical bank and sovereign creditors who observe signals xnb and xng , respectively, and believe that all other bank and sovereign creditors are using the threshold strategy around x^b and x^ g, respectively.
For the typical bank creditor with signal xnb , the expected payoff difference between rolling over and foreclosing is given by

where

b x^ b, x^ g, xnb

 Db 2b

xnb +b

du +

^ b (x^ b )

2b

^ b (x^ b ) xnb -b

1 g

g
dv
^ g(x^ g,x^b,u)

du - 1,

g = (0g + 2 g) , and g = 0g +  g ,

(7)

15

are the width of the support for the g and the upper bound of the support, respectively. The second summand is the payment from the guarantee multiplied by the probability that the bank creditor attaches to the survival of the government.
The difference in expected payoffs from rolling over and foreclosing for a typical sovereign creditor, with signal xng , is

g x^ g, x^ b, xng

 Dg b

b -b

1 2 g

xn g +g
dv
^ g(x^ g,x^b,u)

du - Cg,

(8)

where

b = (b0 + 2b) , and b = b0 + b ,

are the width of the support for b and the upper bound, respectively. Using the piecewise definition of ^g from Equation (6), we can rewrite the double integral in Equation (8) as

Dg b

b 2g

xng +

g

-

x^ 1

g+ +2

g g

- Nb (1 + 2g)

^b -b

u+b du x^b 2b

.

Note further that no guarantee payments come due in the case that all bank creditors
receive signals xnb < x^b and withdraw. By virtue of the uniform distribution assumption, the signals lie on the interval [b - b, b + b]. If the upper bound b + b is less than the threshold x^b, all creditors will withdraw. Thus, for realizations of the fundamental b < x^b - b, the bank fails, but because all bank creditors withdrew, no guarantee payout is made by the government. Utilizing this fact, we can finally write the payoff difference
between rolling over and withdrawing for a sovereign creditor as

g x^ g, x^ b, xng

= Dg 2g

xng +

g

-

x^ 1

g+ +2

g g

- Dg Nb (1 + 2g)b

^b x^ b-b

u

+ b - 2b

x^ b

du

-

C

g

.

(9)

4.4. Equilibrium
From Proposition 2, we know that there exists a unique equilibrium in threshold strategies. Creditors who receive the critical signals (x^b, x^b) must be indifferent between rolling over and withdrawing. Hence,

b x^b, x^ g, x^b = 0,

(10)

and b(x^b, x^ g, xb)  0 if and only if xnb  x^b, and

g x^ g, x^b, x^ g = 0,

(11)

and g(x^ g, x^b, xg)  0 if and only if xng  x^ g. An equilibrium is a combination of critical signals that solves simultaneously solves

Equations (10) and (11). We explore properties of the equilibrium using graphical tech-

niques.

Proposition 3. The solutions to creditors' indifference conditions, Equations (10) and (11) can be characterized by functions fb and f g where x^b = fb(x^ g) and x^ g = f g(x^b). Moreover, fb is strictly increasing whereas f g is strictly decreasing.
Proof. See Appendix.

16

x^ g x^ g

fb(x^ g)

- g
f g(x^b)
-b x^b x^ b
Figure 2: Best reply curves fb and f g. The joint equilibrium in the roll over games occurs at the
intersection point (x^b, x^g).

The functions fb and f g can be interpreted as aggregate best response functions between bank and sovereign creditors. The equilibrium of the model is then given by the intersection of the two curves.
Figure 2 illustrates the equilibrium. The best response curve for bank creditors, fb, is strictly increasing over the entire range of x^ g, implying that the actions of sovereign creditors are strategic complements for bank creditors. As sovereign creditors increase their critical signal, the risk of a government default increases and the likelihood that the guarantee will be paid out decreases. In response, bank creditors increase their critical signal as well. In contrast, f g is strictly decreasing over the entire range of x^b, implying that the actions of bank creditors are strategic substitutes for sovereign creditors. This deserves some comment. We show in the proof of Proposition 3 that

 f g(x^b)  - x^b

^ b (x^ b )
(u + b - x^b) du .
x^ b-b

Suppose that bank creditors increase their critical signal x^b. This exerts two oppos-
ing effects on sovereign creditors' payoffs, and thus on their critical signal x^ g. Firstly, a higher x^b increases ^b and enlarges the range of b realizations where the bank may de-
fault and the guarantee comes due. This, in turn, decreases sovereign creditors' expected

payoffs from rolling over and leads them to increase their critical signal as well. From

the expression above, this effect is, up to a constant, given by

(^b

+

b

-

x^ b

)

^b x^ b

There is, however, a second, opposing effect. As x^b increases, fewer bank creditors mistakenly rollover their debt whenever the bank fails. Consequently, the guarantee payout for the government is lowered. This is true for all states b < ^b. In turn, the likelihood that the government survives rises and a typical sovereign creditor's expected
payoff from rolling over increases. Formally, this effect is, up to the same constant, given
by -(^b + b - x^b).

But the second effect outweighs the first one as long as b > 0 since ^b = Nb < 1 , x^b Nb + 2b

17

leading to the downward sloping aggregate best response curve for the sovereign creditors.

4.5. Comparative statics
We now analyze the comparative statics properties of the critical signals with respect to the guarantee size , the degree of bank's funding illiquidity Nb, and the ex-ante expected liquidities b0 and 0g for bank and government, respectively.
Figure 3(a) depicts the effects of a marginal increase in . The increase shifts the fb curve to the left. For any given x^ g, a higher guarantee increases bank creditors expected payoff from rolling over, and lowers their critical signal. The f g­curve is shifted to the right. For any given x^b, a higher guarantee lowers the probability that the government survives and, in response, sovereign creditors raise their critical signal. The increase in the guarantee thereby exerts a direct effect on the payoffs for both bank and sovereign creditors, as well as an indirect effect through a change in the respective other type of creditors' critical signal. For sovereign creditors both effects work in the same direction and produce a clear-cut total effect. For bank creditors, the two effects work in opposite directions. An increase in the critical signal of sovereign creditors lowers bank creditors' expected payoffs from rolling over and thereby counters the positive effect of the higher guarantee. If, however, the rightward shift in the f g curve is sufficiently small, then the latter effect outweighs the former and bank creditors' critical signal is lowered. The following Lemma provides a necessary and sufficient condition for this to occur.

Proposition 4. A marginal increase in the guarantee lowers bank creditors' critical signals, i.e. x^b/ < 0, if and only if

Nb b

^b x^ b-b

u + b - x^b du 2b

<

g

- ^ g(^b)

(12)

Proof. See proof of Lemma A6 in the Appendix.

The left­hand side of condition (12) is the ex ante expected guarantee payout, conditional on the government surviving. The right­hand side is the difference between the government's maximal cash­flow, i.e. the upper bound g of the support for g, and the minimal, cash flow it needs to survive. We may interpret the right­hand side as the "slack" in available liquidity for the government. A marginal increase in the guarantee leads bank creditors to decrease their critical signal if and only if the ex ante expected guarantee payout is less than the government's slack in liquidity. Condition (12) can thus be interpreted as a "credibility condition". We say that a guarantee = ~ is credible if condition (12) is satisfied when evaluated at = ~. If condition (12) fails to hold, bank creditors may ex ante judge government's resources to be insufficient to cover the guarantee promise and respond by raising their critical signal. It is straightforward to show that the condition always holds for = 0, implying that the introduction of a small guarantee is always credible and lowers bank creditors' critical signal. However, as the following corollary states, if a guarantee is credible, then further increases in the guarantee can lead to a reversal of the condition, i.e. by increasing the expected burden on the government's budget, the guarantee erodes its own credibility.
Corollary 1. Suppose condition (12) is satisfied for a given guarantee ~. A further marginal increase in the guarantee increases the the ex-ante expected guarantee payout, while at the same time diminishes the government's slack of liquidity.

18

x^ g
x^g( ) x^g( )

Figure 3: Comparative statics of (x^b, x^g).

fb(x^ g, ) fb(x^ g, )

x^ g

xx^^gg((NNbb))

fb(x^ g, Nb) fb(x^ g, Nb)

f g(x^b, ) f g(x^b, )

x^b( ) x^b( )

x^ b

:Panel (a) Change in (x^b , x^g ) due to increase in guarantee from to

given that (12) holds.

,

x^ g fb(x^ g)

x^g(b0 ) x^ g (b0 )

f g(x^ b, b0)

x^g(b0 ) x^g(b0)

f g(x^ b, x^b0b)

:Panel (c) Change in (x^b , x^g ) due to increase in bank's expected liquidity

from b0 /2 to b0 /2.

f g(x^b, Nb) f g(x^b, Nb)

Panel (b):
Nb to Nb .

x^ b (Nb ) x^ b (Nb )

x^ b

Change in (x^b , x^g ) due to increase in funding illiquidity from

x^ g fb(x^ g, 0g) fb(x^ g, 0g )

x^g(0g ) x^ g (0g )

f g(x^ g)

x^b(0g ) x^b(0g)

x^ b

:Panel (d) Change in (x^b , x^g ) due to increase in government's

expected liquidity from 0g /2 to 0g /2.

Figure 3(b) depicts the effect of an increase in the bank's exposure to funding illiquidity, Nb. A higher degree of funding illiquidity is associated with a higher probability of bank failure and consequently with larger expected guarantee payments. Thus, increases in Nb shift both the fb and f g curves to the right. This leads to a higher critical signal for bank creditors. From the graphical analysis alone, the sign of the effect on sovereign creditors' critical signal is not clear-cut. On one hand, a larger Nb increases the ex-ante guarantee payments, which diminishes the government's liquidity and increases the critical signal for sovereign creditors (given and x^b). However, as a consequence of strategic substitutability, a higher critical signal for bank creditors makes sovereign creditors more willing to roll over, thereby mitigating the effect on the sovereign creditors' critical signal. As shown in Lemma A6 in the Appendix, the latter `substitutability effect' is smaller in magnitude than the former, complementarities effect, implying that a larger Nb always leads to an increase in sovereign creditors' critical signal.
Figures 3(c) and 3(d) finally depict the effects of increases in the ex ante expected liquidity for the bank, b0, and government, 0g, respectively. An increase in b0 leaves the fb­curve unaffected and shifts f g to the left, thereby lowering the critical signals for both, bank and sovereign creditors. The decisions of bank creditors are based on updated information on b that is obtained from the signals xnb , which do not depend on b0. Sovereign creditors, on the other hand, do not receive updated information about b, and must instead reply on b0. A higher ex-ante liquidity for the bank raises the
19

probability that the bank survives and lowers the government's expected payments due to the guarantee promise. This in turn increases sovereign creditors' expected payoffs from rolling over and lowers their critical signal. By virtue of the strategic complementarities, the lowering of x^ g leads to a lowering of the critical signal x^b for the bank's creditors.
An increase in 0g, on the other hand, has a markedly different effect. Following similar lines of reason as discussed above, 0g affects only bank creditors' expected payoffs and leaves sovereign creditors' expected payoffs unaffected. An increase in 0g then increases the likelihood that the government manages to roll over its debt and therefore it increases the probability that the guarantee can be paid out. This leads bank creditors to lower their critical signal. However, since the actions of bank creditors are strategic substitutes for sovereign creditors, the critical signal for sovereign creditors is increased.
These results suggest that whenever bank and sovereign are connected through the guarantee promise, a positive spill-over effect exists from the bank's liquid resources to the likelihood that the government manages its debt roll over and survives. Similarly, an improvement in the government's ex ante liquidity also spills over to the likelihood that the bank survives. Yet, this comes at the cost of a higher critical signal of sovereign creditors which, in turn, may jeopardize the beneficial effect of the improved 0g on the government's likelihood of managing the debt roll over.
5. The optimal guarantee and its properties
In this section we determine the optimal guarantee based on a stylized measure for expected costs of crises. Moreover, we discuss how the guarantee affects the probabilities of sovereign default, bank default, and dual default (a systemic crisis).
5.1. A measure for expected costs of crises
In determining the appropriate guarantee to provide the bank's creditors, the government faces a trade-off between lowering the expected costs stemming from a bank default and placing additional strains on its own budget, and thus raising the likelihood that it enters into default itself. We formalize this trade-off by defining a measure for the expected costs of crises, which the government minimizes by setting optimally.
We denote by b the costs incurred when the bank default and the government survives. Similarly, g denotes the costs from a sovereign default, where the bank survives. Finally, the costs of a systemic crisis, i.e. a crisis where both, government and bank default is denoted s. We normalize all costs by setting s  1. We interpret the costs as the loss in the economy's output that materializes following a default event. In particular, b results from a disruption in financial intermediation and the reduction in available bank credit in the aftermath of default. Banks typically make sizable investments into screening and monitoring technologies, and build long-term relationships with borrowers. Following a bank default, the soft information accrued is lost and has to be acquired anew, which involves costs for the economy as a whole. Moreover, due to the specificity of this information, some of the bank's borrowers cannot easily find a new bank and may become credit constrained. Such constraints may become binding for households and small businesses who, in being confronted with high costs from attempting to borrow on financial markets directly, are highly dependent on financial intermediation via the banking sector.12
12See, for example Leland and Pyle (1977) and Allen and Gale (2001).
20

Similarly, g is the foregone output due to a sovereign default. The default may impose reputation costs on the government, implying higher borrowing costs in the future or even a full exclusion from financial markets. A government default may also exert a negative effect on trade through either sanctions and retaliations, or through reduced access to trade credit. Moreover, empirically, sovereign default is also associated with an immediate effect on economic growth in the default period.13
Denoting by K( ) the expected default costs stemming from the different scenarios, the government's objective is to

min K( )  g Pg( ) - q( ) + b (Pb( ) - q( )) + q( ),
{ [0,1]}

(13)

where Pg( ) denotes the probability that the government defaults, Pb( ) stands for the probability that the bank defaults and q( ) is the probability of a systemic crisis.

We compare the expected costs under the optimally chosen guarantee, denoted by K opt  K( opt), to two benchmarks, (1) the first-best outcome, K FB, that occurs in the

absence of coordination risks for both sovereign and bank creditors, and (2) the costs K0  K(0) incurred in the absence of a guarantee.

Without coordination failures, the government and the bank default if and only if b and g are less than zero. Following the uniform distribution assumption, the first-best benchmark can be calculated as

KFB

=

g

g g

+

b

b b

+ (1 -

g

-

b

)

b b

g g

.

(14)

While K FB provides a floor to the expected costs, the ceiling is given by the costs incurred in absence of a guarantee, i.e.,

K0

=

KFB

+

g

C g/D g g

+

b

1/D b b

+ (1 -

g

-

b) (Cg/D g

+  g)(1/Db gb

+

b) -

gb

.

(15)

5.2. Probabilities of crises In what follows, we write the equilibrium critical signals as x^b( ) and x^g( ) to empha-
size their dependency on the guarantee .14 The probabilities of bank, government and systemic crises, as expressed in the cost function K( ), are

Pb( )  Pr b < ^b( )

and Pg( )  Pr g < ^g( ) ,

and q( )  Pr {b < ^b( )}  {g < ^g( )}
respectively. Moreover, the probability that there is at least one crisis is

Q( )  Pr {b < ^b( )}  {g < ^g( )} .

With respect to the probability of a bank default, the guarantee influences ^b through the critical signal x^b. This can be seen by writing explicitly

1 Pb( ) = b

^b( )
du =
-b

Nb(x^b ( )+b) Nb +2b

+

b

.

b

(16)

13See, for example, Eaton and Gersovitz (1981) and Borensztein and Panizza (2009). 14The default points of government and bank are then written as ^b( )  ^b(x^b( )) and ^g( , b)  ^ g(x^g( ), x^b ( ), b).
21

The guarantee's influence on the probability of a government crisis runs through two
channels. First, there is the effect on the critical signal x^g( ), which induces a level-shift in the default point ^g( , b). This effect is similar to that induced by the guarantee on the bank's default point ^b( ). Secondly, the government's default point depends directly on the bank's liquidity b. This induces a functional interdependence between the like-
lihood of a government default and the bank's liquidity. Calculating the government's
probability of default, therefore requires to integrate over both b and g. Formally,

1 ^b( ) 1 P g( ) = b -b g

=

x^g( )+g 1+2 g

+

g

g

^g ( ,u)
dv du
- g

+

+ 1 Nb2g bg (1 + 2g)

1 b

1 ^g( )

du dv

b ^b( ) g - g

^b(

) u + b - x^b(

) du,

x^b -b

2b

(17)

where the final term makes clear the functional dependency between the government's default probability and the bank's fundamental. This clearly shows how the government's fate does not exclusively lie in the hand of its own creditors but, through the guarantee, becomes closely tied to that of the bank, even though the liquidity resources that otherwise govern individual default probabilities are fully independent.
In much the same way, the probability of a systemic crisis can be calculated as,

1 ^b( ) 1 ^g( ,u)

q( ) =

dv du

b -b g -g

=

x^g( )+g 1+2 g

+g

×

Nb(x^b ( )+b) Nb +2b

+ b

+

1

Nb 2 g

^b(

) u + b - x^b(

) du,

(18)

g

b

bg (1 + 2g) x^b-b

2b

Figure 4 illustrates the impact of the guarantee on the default points ^g( , b) and ^b( ). The guarantee decreases x^b( ) and increases x^g( ). The dotted lines separate the regions of default and survival in absence of the guarantee. The introduction of a
guarantee shifts the bank's default point to the left (dashed line) and enlarges the
region where the bank survives. Moreover, as the guarantee increases the sovereign
creditors' critical signal, the dotted horizontal line moves to the solid line, increasing the
region where the government defaults. In the region where the bank defaults (to the left
of the dashed line), the government's default point is a function of b and therefore the solid line slopes upwards.

5.3. The influence of transparency on the optimal guarantee
The influence of the guarantee in reducing the likelihood of bank default depends on its `credibility', which in turn is determined by the risk of sovereign default. The pertinent question is then whether, and to what degree, a particular guarantee promise undermines the government's credibility to pay by placing undue strains on its refinancing needs. As discussed in Section 3.6, the costs associated with a guarantee promise are crucially dependent on the degree of balance sheet transparency. To better understand the effects of changes in the degrees of balance sheet transparency, b and g, on the optimal policy, we explore two extreme cases.

5.3.1. Transparent bank
With a high degree of balance sheet transparency for the bank, i.e. b becoming negligibly small, bank creditors face only strategic uncertainty about the behavior of

22

g
government survival bank default
^b( , b)

government survival bank survival

^ g( = 0)
government default bank default

government default bank survival

^b( ) ^b( = 0)

b

Figure 4: Regions of bank and / or sovereign default in b­g­space.

other bank creditors. The coordination failure of bank creditors can be avoided, at zero cost to the government, by issuing a sufficiently large guarantee promise.15

Lemma 1. In the limit when the bank is fully transparent (b  0) and for any degree of

transparency of the government ( g  0), the default points for bank and government are

given by

^b(

) = Nb 1 - Db -

(1 - Pg) (1 - Pg)

and

^ g

=

Cg Dg

,

where Pg = C g/D g +  g g.

Proof. See Appendix.
While sovereign default risk influences the critical threshold b( ), the guarantee does not put any additional strains on the government and its threshold converges to the one in the canonical model. This implies a clear-cut negative effect of a higher guarantee on the costs of crises K( ). The government's program has a corner solution.

Lemma 2. If the bank is fully transparent, the first-order necessary condition for the government's program is given by

K(

)

=

-

Nb b

(1 - (Db

P g )(D b - (1 -

- Cb) P g ))2

(1 - Pg)b + Pg

1 - g

< 0.

(19)

Proof. See Appendix.

The optimal guarantee for a fully transparent bank is provided in the following proposition.
Proposition 5. If the bank is fully transparent, the optimal guarantee becomes opt = 1, and it provides a full coverage of bank creditors' claims.

Proof. See Appendix.

15This is the result obtained by Bebchuk and Goldstein (2010).

23

Although the full guarantee shrinks the range of fundamentals where inefficient bank

runs occur, it does not completely remove the possibility of inefficient bank failures. As

the government itself defaults with probability Pg, even a full guarantee is not enough to achieve ^b(1) = 0. To remove all inefficient bank failures, the government would have

to set

1 = > 1,
1 - Pg

(20)

which is tantamount to rewarding bank creditors for a bank failure.

5.3.2. Opaque bank and transparent government
The result presented in Proposition 5 depends only on the transparency of the bank and is independent of the government's transparency. Indeed, transparency of the government plays an entirely different role than transparency of the bank. g has no decisive influence on whether the guarantee creates an actual cost or not. Equation (17) suggests that higher government transparency can reduce the guarantee's effect on the government's critical threshold in those cases when the bank's balance sheet is rather opaque. But even when the government is fully transparent, the optimal policy set out in Proposition 5 may change if the bank is opaque. For example, for b > 0 and g  0, the default points of bank and government are given by

^b(

) = Nb(x^b( ) + b) Nb + 2b

and

^g( ) = x^g( ),

and the derivative of the cost of crisis function becomes

K(

1 )=
b

b(1 - Pg(

)) + (1 - g)Pg(

)

Nb x^b( Nb + 2b 

)

1 +
g

g(1 - Pb(

)) + (1 - b)Pb(

)

 x^ g ( 

) ,

(21)

with Pg(

)

:=

x^g( )+ g g

and Pb(

)

:=

Nb(x^b ( )+b+b)+2bb b ( Nb +2b )

.

The sign of K ( ), and hence the optimal guarantee policy, are no longer parameter­

independent. In particular, they crucially depend on the costs of crises b and g and on the remaining parameters governing the model. While conceptually simple, the gov-

ernment's program does not yield tractable analytical solutions. We therefore resort to

a numerical analysis in order to determine the optimal guarantee and examine its de-

pendency on the degrees of transparency and on the parameters governing the liquidity

situations of government and bank.

6. Numerical analysis
We explore the consequences of changes in the degrees of banking sector and government transparency through a set of numerical exercises, where we fix the cost parameters b and g, associated with bank and sovereign defaults respectively, at some empirically plausible values and where we calibrate, in broad strokes, the model to the Irish economy.
6.1. Calibrating the Celtic crisis According to Table A1, the first guarantee scheme introduced by the Irish government
covered banking sector liabilities that amounted to 244% of Irish GDP. According to IMF (2011), the refinancing needs of the Irish banks amounted to around 25% of their total
24

liabilities. This roughly equates to refinancing needs in the order of 61% of GDP. In
contrast, the Irish government faced financing needs of only 19.5% of GDP in 2011. This
implies that the amount of maturing claims of Irish banks was approximately three times
that of the Irish government, implying a value of Nb = 3, where we continue to maintain Ng = 1. Moreover, in line with the experience prior to the crisis, we assume that the risk premia of Irish banks were higher than that of the Irish government and thus set
Db = 1.75 and D g = 1.5. We also set Cb = Cg = 1. To ensure that the dominance regions of the two rollover games are well-defined, we
take b = 4.01, g = 1.01, b0 = 3 and 0g = 4. Consequently, the banking sector is exposed to a large rollover risk, with expected liquidity b0/2 covering only 50% of total maturing claims. For the government, in contrast, expected liquidity is double the amount of maturing claims.16
We normalize the cost of a systemic crisis to s = 1. Cost parameters b and g are thus interpreted as the output losses due to individual bank and sovereign crises,
respectively, relative to the loss due to a systemic crisis. Table 5 provides a brief overview
of the empirical estimates of such losses. The cumulative output losses associated with
a systemic crisis amount to 54% of the pre-crisis GDP. The output loss of a sovereign
default only event is at around 10% of GDP. Estimated losses due to a solo banking crisis
range from 6.3% to 28% of GDP. For the first exercise in this section we set g = 0.2 (which approximates 10%/54% = 0.185  0.2) and b = 0.1 (approximating 6.3%/54% = 0.116  0.1). In the second exercise, we maintain the value of g, but we change b to 0.5, thus approximating 28%/54%.

Source Hoggarth et al. (2002) Honohan and Klingebiel (2000) Hutchison and Noy (2005) De Paoli et al. (2009)
John H. Boyd (2005)

Type of crisis Banking Banking Banking Sovereign
Twin (Sovereign and Banking) Banking

Duration 3.2 3.5 3.3 4 11 5.1

Average annual output 1.9% 3.6% 3.0% 2.5% 4.9% 5.4%

Table 5: Costs of different types of crises. Output loss in percent of annual GDP. Reported values are the
average losses reported in the respective studies.

In what follows, we measure the welfare gain from introducing the optimal guarantee as
welfare = K 0 - K opt.
Moreover, in order to assess the impact of the optimal guarantee on the likelihood of crises, we consider the differences in the probabilities of different crises between having the optimal guarantee and having no guarantee, i.e. we write

Pb  Pb( opt) - Pb(0) and Pg  Pg( opt) - Pg(0),

as well as

Q  Q( opt) - Q(0) and q  q( opt) - q(0).

16The choice of b allows for variations of b up to 2, whereas the choice of g allows for variations of g up to 0.5. As the preceding sections made clear, the choice of g is of lesser importance for the outcome of the model, which is why we restrict ourselves to only a limited range of variations.
25

6.2. Results
Figure 5 shows the comparative statics exercises with respect to b and g where we have set g = 0.2 and put the costs of a banking crisis to b = 0.1. As can be seen from Panel (a), a lower degree of transparency in the banking sector (higher b) may decrease the optimal guarantee. Moreover, as the difference between the black, the gray and the dashed gray line in Panel (a) indicates, this effect is more pronounced when the degree of transparency of the government is also lower (i.e. g is higher). As shown in Panel (b), the expected welfare gain is highest when transparency of banks and government is highest and amounts to roughly 1.2% of GDP ( 0.022 × 54%). Reductions in the government's transparency are associated with an expected welfare loss of at most 0.27% of GDP. Panels (c)­(f) in Figure 5 show how the probability differences Q, q, Pb and Pg vary with changes in b and g. As one would expect, the probability of a sovereign crisis rises by the introduction of the optimal guarantee. However, it rises less than the reduction in the probability of a banking crisis, which in turn explains why probabilities q and Q are decreasing. Higher bank balance sheet transparency is clearly enhancing the effect of the guarantee on probabilities Pb, q and Q, while it mitigates the adverse effect on Pg. As already discussed in the previous sections, when the bank becomes fully transparent (b  0), the introduction of a guarantee comes at no cost for the government as it is never used and insofar it exerts no effect on the probability Pg. Moreover, a less transparent government significantly dampens the effect of the guarantee on all probabilities.
Figure 6 shows the numerical results when g is kept at 0.2 and when b = 0.5 thereby approximating the highest output loss of a solo banking crisis in Table 5. Several important differences emerge compared to the previous exercise. Firstly, as can be seen from Panel (a), given the high costs of a bank default, the government finds it now optimal to provide a full guarantee ( opt = 1) independent of its own degree of transparency and the degree of bank transparency. Secondly, from Panel (f), Pg increases linearly with lower transparency of the banks, yet it is unaffected by changes in the government's transparency.17 Thirdly, from Panel (c), a combination of low degree of bank and government transparency (high b and g) may now increase the probability of experiencing a systemic crises above the level which obtains in the absence of a guarantee. This effect is basically driven by the increase in Pg, since, from Panel (e), the change in the probability of a banking crisis is rather flat. Quantitatively, this effect seems to be rather small, yet it constitutes a marked qualitative difference to the previous exercise where the costs of a banking crisis were smaller than the costs of a sovereign crisis. Finally, the maximum welfare gain (when government and banking sector are quite transparent) amounts to roughly 2.38% of GDP, which is larger than previously.
A robust finding throughout these numerical exercises is that the increase in the government's default probability is, in absolute magnitude, significantly smaller than the reduction in the bank's default probability. This replicates the empirical behavior of CDS­spreads that we alluded to in the introduction (see Figure 1, Panel (d)) and allows us to put forward an interpretation of this stylized fact. Recall that in our model, under a regime of full bank transparency (  0), no guarantee payout will ever come due. This implies, as can be seen from the corresponding panels in Figures 5 and 6, that for a relatively high degree of bank transparency, the sovereign's default probability remains almost unchanged when the guarantee is introduced, whereas the impact on the bank's default probability is large. The guarantee removes strategic uncertainty, thereby serv-
17This result is robust to other numerical specifications whenever b > g.
26

ing as a device to coordinate bank creditors on the efficient equilibrium. When the degree of bank transparency becomes smaller, the mass of bank creditors who may eventually claim the guarantee increases and, in case the bank defaults, the guarantee creates an actual cost burden for the government. As a result, the government's default probability begins to increase. The large decrease in CDS spreads across countries (and especially in Ireland), that was observed right after the issuance of bank debt guarantees, may therefore mirror the removal of strategic uncertainty among bank creditors. However, sovereign CDS­spreads increased at the same time, which suggests that the corresponding banking sectors may not have operated under a regime of full transparency. Market participants in sovereign funding markets may have conjectured that the guarantees would create an actual cost for the sovereign and therefore withdrew funding.
Moreover, while it is tempting to criticize the Irish government for having provided an enormous guarantee, at least our numerical exercises suggest that even such a guarantee may have been the optimal one. In particular, as Ireland's financial industry constituted an important sector of its economy, the output costs of an economy­wide banking crisis may have been quite large so that, as shown by the exercise in Figure 6, for any degree of transparency the government would have considered a 100% coverage optimal. Yet, if transparency was rather low, such a policy may have contributed to heighten ex ante the likelihood of the systemic crisis which Ireland eventually experienced. Figure 6 suggests that, given the strong reduction in the probability of a relatively costly banking crisis, the government may optimally drive up the likelihood of its own default, which is less costly, to save the expected costs of a banking crisis, even if this also means to raise the probability of a systemic crisis above the level without a guarantee.
7. Conclusion
In this paper we have analyzed the effects of a bank debt guarantee provided by the government and the role played by the degree of balance sheet transparency in making the guarantee costly. To examine this phenomenon, we used a stylized global games framework to address the following questions: (i) How does the introduction of a bank liability guarantee by a government affect the behavior of banking and sovereign creditors? (ii) How does the guarantee affect the likelihood of crises? (iii) What is the optimal guarantee that trades-off the expected costs associated with the different types of crises? and (iv) How do changes in the parameters governing fundamental uncertainty / transparency and liquidity impact on the optimal guarantee?
As the guarantee promise increases the sovereign's expected liabilities, sovereign creditors may lend to the government less often, thereby increasing the government's own likelihood of default. This in turn can jeopardize the effectiveness of the guarantee as bank creditors become less eager to rely on the guarantee when they expect that the government becomes unable to fund its promises.
Proposition 4 provides a necessary and sufficient condition for the guarantee to be effective in raising the incentives of bank creditors to roll over their loans. Moreover, our model provides a theoretical foundation for the empirically observed behavior of credit default spreads during the recent crisis across the different countries that issued bank debt guarantees. Our results show a clear cut welfare improvement with greater transparency, which lowers fundamental uncertainty. This would suggest that in designing guarantee schemes, authorities can improve on their credibility by mandating greater disclosure on the part of the banks. These findings are in line with the new approaches being sought by several countries, as discussed in the Basel Committee for Banking Su-
27

pervision (2011) report. Moreover, by improving on the government's own transparency, these gains can be further enhanced.
While reduced form, the model captures key strategic interactions across sovereign and bank creditors in the design of optimal guarantee schemes, that are often assumed exogenous. Such cautionary tales equally apply to the design of new regulations, where authorities focus on effects in partial, rather than general equilibrium models.
28

Figure 5: Comparative statics of b and g with b = 0.1 and g = 0.2

lOPT 1.2 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0

0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0b
:Panel (a) Optimal guarantee: opt

g 0.05 g 0.25 g 0.5

welfare gain 0.025

0.020

0.015

0.010

0.005

0.000

0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0b

:Panel (b) Welfare gain: K0 - K opt

g 0.05 g 0.25 g 0.5

q 0.01

0.00

0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0b

0.01 0.02 0.03

g 0.05 g 0.25 g 0.5

:Panel (c) Change in probability of systemic crisis: q

Q 0.02

0.00 0.02

0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0b

0.04 0.06

g 0.05 g 0.25 g 0.5

:Panel (d) Change in probability of any crisis: Q

Pb

0.04

0.02

0.00 0.02

0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0b

0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10

g 0.05 g 0.25 g 0.5

:Panel (e) Change in probability of banking crisis: Pb

Pg 0.10

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02 0.00 0.02 0.04

g 0.05

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0b

g 0.25

g 0.5

:Panel (f) Change in probability of sovereign crisis: Pg

29

Figure 6: Comparative statics of b and g with b = 0.5 and g = 0.2

lOPT 1.2 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0

0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0b
:Panel (a) Optimal guarantee: opt

g 0.05 g 0.25 g 0.5

welfare gain 0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0.00

0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0b

:Panel (b) Welfare gain: K0 - K opt

g 0.05 g 0.25 g 0.5

q 0.01

0.00

0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0b

0.01 0.02 0.03

g 0.05 g 0.25 g 0.5

:Panel (c) Change in probability of systemic crisis: q

Q 0.01

0.00 0.01

0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0b

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06

:Panel (d) Change in probability of any crisis: Q

g 0.05 g 0.25 g 0.5

Pb

0.04

0.02

0.00 0.02

0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0b

0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10

g 0.05 g 0.25 g 0.5

:Panel (e) Change in probability of banking crisis: Pb

Pg 0.10

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02 0.00 0.02 0.04

g 0.05

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0b

g 0.25

g 0.5

:Panel (f) Change in probability of sovereign crisis: Pg

30

Country Austria
France
Ireland Ireland
Italy Netherlands
Portugal Spain
United Kingdom

Name of program

Interbank Mar-

ket Support Act

(Finanzmarktsta-

bilisierungsgesetz)

Société de Refi-

nancement des

Activités des Etab-

lissements

de

Crédit

Financial Support

Act 2008

Eligible Liabilities

Guarantee Scheme

2009

Italian Guarantee

Scheme

2008 Credit Guar-

antee Scheme

Portuguese State

Guarantee Scheme

2008

Spanish Guarantee

Scheme

2008 Credit Guar-

antee Scheme

Issued Oct 2008
Oct 2008
Oct 2008 Dec 2009 Nov 2008 Oct 2008 Oct 2008 Dec2008 Oct 2008

Tenor 3-5 years
5 years
2 years 5 years 5 years 5 years 3 years 5 years 3 years

Size
(bn of domestic currency)
75
265
440 150
40 200 20
100 250

GDP
(bn of domestic currency)
283
1,931
180 161
1,575 594 172
1,088 1,434

Size
(% of GDP)
27%
14%
244% 93%
3% 34% 12%
9% 17%

GSD
(bn of domestic currency)
181
1,319
80 105
1,667 348 123
437 752

Size
(% of GSD)
42%
20%
553% 143%
2% 58% 16%
23% 33%

31

Table A1: Summary of guarantee schemes introduced in several developed economies following the collapse of Lehman Brothers. All monetary figures are provided in the country of origin's local currency. The column labeled `Size' refers to the size of the guarantee; 'GDP' refers to the Gross Domestic Product; `GSD' stands for Gross Sovereign Debt.

Figure A2: Claims on, and of Irish banks vs the Irish government's revenue as fractions of Irish GDP.

Irish Government Revenue Irish GDP

37.5 2006
37.0
36.5

2007

36.0

35.5 2005
35.0

34.5 200

250

37.5 37.0 36.5

36.7 0.003 x

2010

2011 2009
300 350 400 Claims On Irish Banks Irish GDP

450

2006

2007

2008 500 550

36.0 35.5 35.0 34.5
250

0.004 x 34.5
2005 2010

2008

2009 300 350
Claims Of Irish Banks Irish GDP

400

450

Irish Government Revenue Irish GDP

32

References
Acharya, V. V., Drechsler, I., Schnabl, P., 2011. A pyrrhic victory? bank bailouts and sovereign credit risk, mimeo, New York University.
Allen, F., Gale, D., 2001. Comparing Financial Systems. No. 0262511258 in MIT Press Books. The MIT Press.
Bannier, C. E., Heinemann, F., September 2005. Optimal transparency and risk-taking to avoid currency crises. Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics (JITE) 161 (3).
Bebchuk, L. A., Goldstein, I., May 2010. Self-fulfilling credit market freezes. NBER Working Papers 16031, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Bindseil, U., König, P. J., 2012. Target 2 and the european sovereign debt crisis. Kredit und Kapital 45 (2), 135­175.
Borensztein, E., Panizza, U., November 2009. The costs of sovereign default. IMF Staff Papers 56 (4), 683­741.
Chui, M., Gai, P., Haldane, A. G., March 2002. Sovereign liquidity crises: Analytics and implications for public policy. Journal of Banking & Finance 26 (2-3), 519­546.
Cooper, R., September 2012. Fragile debt and the credible sharing of strategic uncertainty. NBER Working Papers 18377, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Dasgupta, A., 2004. Financial contagion through capital connections: A model of the origin and spread of bank panics. Journal of the European Economic Association 2, 1049­1084.
De Paoli, B., Hoggarth, G., Saporta, V., February 2009. Output costs of sovereign crises: Some empirical estimates. Bank of England working papers 362, Bank of England.
Diamond, D. W., Dybvig, P. H., June 1983. Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity. Journal of Political Economy 91 (3), 401­19.
DIW, October 2012. Risiko staatsanleihen. DIW Wochenbericht.
Eaton, J., Gersovitz, M., April 1981. Debt with potential repudiation: Theoretical and empirical analysis. Review of Economic Studies 48 (2), 289­309.
Goldstein, I., April 2005. Strategic complementarities and the twin crises. Economic Journal 115 (503), 368­390.
Goldstein, I., Pauzner, A., June 2005. Demand deposit contracts and the probability of bank runs. Journal of Finance 60 (3), 1293­1328.
Heinemann, F., Illing, G., December 2002. Speculative attacks: unique equilibrium and transparency. Journal of International Economics 58 (2), 429­450.
Hoggarth, G., Reis, R., Saporta, V., May 2002. Costs of banking system instability: Some empirical evidence. Journal of Banking & Finance 26 (5), 825­855.
33

Holthausen, C., Pill, H., 2010. The forgotten markets: how understanding money markets helps us understand the financial crisis. Research Bulletin 9, European Central Bank.
Honohan, P., 2010. The irish banking crisis: regulatory and financial stability policy 2003-2008. Tech. rep., Irish Minister for Finance by the Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland.
Honohan, P., Klingebiel, D., Sep. 2000. Controlling the fiscal costs of banking crises. Policy Research Working Paper Series 2441, The World Bank.
Hutchison, M. M., Noy, I., August 2005. How bad are twins? output costs of currency and banking crises. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 37 (4), 725­52.
IMF, April 2011. Global financial stability report.
John H. Boyd, Sungkyu Kwa, B. S., December 2005. The real output losses associated with modern banking crises. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 37 (6), 977­999.
Kasahara, T., June 2009. Coordination failure among multiple lenders and the role and effects of public policy. Journal of Financial Stability 5 (2), 183­198.
Leland, H. E., Pyle, D. H., May 1977. Informational asymmetries, financial structure, and financial intermediation. Journal of Finance 32 (2), 371­87.
Lindner, A., 03 2006. Does transparency of central banks produce multiple equilibria on currency markets? Scandinavian Journal of Economics 108 (1), 1­14.
Manz, M., 2010. Information-based contagion and implications for financial stability. European Economic Review 54 (7), 900­910.
Wall Street Journal, 2011. Finance ministers agree to eu debt guarantees. online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970204012004577070000623643064.html.
Morris, S., Shin, H. S., June 1998. Unique equilibrium in a model of self-fulfilling currency attacks. American Economic Review 88 (3), 587­97.
Morris, S., Shin, H. S., 2000. NBER Macroeconomics Annual. MIT Press, Ch. Rethinking multiple equilibria in macroeconomic modelling, pp. 139 ­ 161.
Morris, S., Shin, H. S., 2003. Global games: theory and applications. In: Hansen, L. P., Turnovsky, S. J., Dewatripont, M. (Eds.), Advances in Economics and Econometrics. Cambridge University Press, pp. 56­114.
Morris, S., Shin, H. S., September 2006. Catalytic finance: When does it work? Journal of International Economics 70 (1), 161­177.
Obstfeld, M., April 1996. Models of currency crises with self-fulfilling features. European Economic Review 40 (3-5), 1037­1047.
Rochet, J.-C., Vives, X., December 2004. Coordination failures and the lender of last resort: Was bagehot right after all? Journal of the European Economic Association 2 (6), 1116­1147.
34

Schich, S., Kim, B.-H., 2011. Guarantee arrangements for financial promises: how widely should the safety net be cast? OECD Journal: Financial Market Trends 2011, 1­35.
Shao, J., 2003. Mathematical Statistics, 2nd Edition. Springer Texts in Statistics. Springer.
Shin, H. S., July 2012. Global banking glut and loan risk premium. IMF Economic Review 60, 155­192.
Taylor, J. B., Williams, J. C., 2008. A black swan in the money market. NBER Working Paper No. 13943.

Appendix

Proof of Proposition 1. Morris and Shin (2003) show that the model has a unique symmetric threshold equilibrium where creditors use the strategy around x^b and the bank defaults whenever b < ^b. The
creditor who observes xnb = x^b must therefore be indifferent between rolling over and foreclosing. Thus, the expected payoff difference between rolling over and foreclosing is given by

DbPr b > ^b x^b + Pr b  ^b x^b - Cb = 0,

(A22)

which, by using the assumed uniform distributions, can be written as

Db -Cb = 1

^b
du.

Db -

2b x^b-b

(A23)

Due to the law of large numbers, b(b) = Pr

xnb  x^ b

b

=

x^ b b -b
2b

du
.

Combining

the

latter

with

failure

condition (1) yields

1 x^b du = ^b .

2b ^b-b

Nb

(A24)

From Equation (A23),

1- Db -Cb = Cb -

1 = 1-

^b 1 du =

x^ b
du,

Db -

Db -

2b x^b-b

2b ^b-b

and combining the latter with Equation (A24) gives Equation (3) in the text,

Nb (Cb - Db -

) = ^b.

Moreover, solving Equation (A24) for x^b, gives Equation (2) in the text,

1 x^b du = x^ b - ^b + b = ^b

2b ^b-b

2b Nb

 x^b = ^b

1 + 2b Nb

- b.

Proof of Proposition 2. By our assumption on the independence between random variables b and g, we can consider each game separately and treat the fundamental and the strategy in the respective other game as exogenously given. Thus, as shown in the following Lemmas A3 and A4, bank creditors respond to any strategy played by sovereign creditors by using a unique threshold strategy. Moreover, as shown in Lemma A5, government creditors respond to any strategy played by bank creditors by using a unique threshold strategy. As a direct consequence, the unique equilibrium in the model is a threshold equilibrium.

35

To prove Lemmas A3 - A5, the following Claims A1 and A2 provide some properties of the payoff

differentials of bank and sovereign creditors respectively.

Denote the fraction of bank creditors who withdraw by b and suppose that government creditors

play any symmetric strategy sg(xng ). Given the government's liquidity g, we can write the fraction of

government creditors who withdraw as

 g + g  g - g

s(xng )dxng .

The

payoff

differential

between

rolling

over

and

withdrawing for a typical bank creditor can then be written as

D 

b

-

C

b



b(b, b, g, s g(·)) =  - Cb

 -Cb

if b < b, g

if b > b,

 g + g  g - g

s g(xng )dxng

<

g

-

(1

-

b)

if b > b,

 g + g  g - g

s g(xng )dxng

>

g

-

(1

-

b)

(A25)

Claim A1. Bank creditors' payoff differential (A25) has the following properties. 1. Action single-crossing in b: For any b and g, there exists b such that b > 0 for any b <  and b < 0 for any b > b. 2. State monotonicity in b: b is non-decreasing in b. 3. Laplacian State Monotonicity: There exists a unique b such that

1
(b, b, g, s g(·))db = 0.
0

4. Uniform Limit Dominance: There exist b and b such that b < - for b < b and b >  for b > b for some  > 0.
Moreover, the noise distribution satisfies
5. Monotone Likelihood Property.
6. Finite expectations of signals.

Proof of Claim A1. 1. Note that Db - Cb > 0 > - Cb > -Cb. Action single-crossing then follows by setting b = b.

2. Can be inferred immediately from Equation (A25).

3.

We can write the integral

1 0

(b

,

b

,



g

,

s

g (·))db

as

follows

(Db - Cb)

b
db - Cb

min 1,1-

-1 ( g -

g +g g -g

s g(xn g )dxn g )

db

0 b

1

+(

- Cb)

min

1,1-

-1 ( g -

g +g g -g

s g (xn g

)dxn g

)

db = 0.

As the left hand side of the equality sign is negative for b = 0, positive for b = 1 and otherwise

strictly increasing in b, there exists a unique b such that

1 0

(b,

b

,



g

,

s

g

(·))db

=

0.

4. The claim follows by setting b = 0, b = 1 and  = min{Cb - , Db - Cb}.

5. Uniform noise satisfies MLRP, see (Shao, 2003, p. 399).

6. This follows immediately from the assumption of a uniform distribution with bounded support.

Suppose that bank creditors play any strategy sb(xnb ). Given any b, we can then write the fraction

of bank creditors who withdraw as

b +b b -b

sb(xnb

)dxnb

.

The payoff differential between rolling over and

withdrawing for a typical government creditor is then given by

D 

g

-

C

g







g

( g

,



g

,

b

,

s

b

(·))

=

D g -C 

-
g

C

g





-C g

if g < g,

b +b b -b

sb(xnb )dxnb

<

b

if g < g - (1 -

b +b b -b

sb(xnb

)dxnb

)

,

if g > g - (1 -

b +b b -b

sb(xnb

)dxnb

)

,

if g > g, b

b +b b -b

sb(xnb )dxnb

>

b

b +b b -b

sb(xnb )dxnb

>

b

(A26)

36

Claim A2. Government creditors' payoff differential (A26) has the following properties. 1. Action monotonicity in g: g is non-increasing in g. 2. State monotonicity in g: g is non-decreasing in g. 3. Laplacian State Monotonicity: There exists a unique g such that
1
(g, g, b, sb(·))dg = 0.
0
4. Uniform Limit Dominance: There exist  g and  g such that g < - for g <  g and g >  for g >  g for some  > 0.
Moreover, the noise distribution satisfies
5. Monotone Likelihood Property.
6. Finite expectations of signals.
Proof of Claim A2. 1. Suppose b > b, then, since D g - Cg > -Cg, g is clearly non-increasing in g for any g. Similarly for the case where b < b.
2. Suppose b > b, then g is increasing in g for any g. Similarly for b < b. 3. If b > b, then g = C g/D g. If b < b, then g = C g/D g + (1 - b) .
4. This follows by setting  g = 1 + and  g = 0 and  = D g - Cg. 5. Uniform noise satisfies MLRP, see (Shao, 2003, p. 399).
6. This follows immediately from the assumption of a uniform distribution with bounded support.

Lemma A3. For any strategy sg(·) played by government creditors, the rollover game between bank creditors has a unique threshold equilibrium.

Proof of Lemma A3. Since the payoff differential satisfies properties (1) to (6) in Claim A1, the Lemma follows from (Morris and Shin, 2003, Lemma 2.3).

Lemma A4. There are no other equilibria in non-threshold strategies.

Proof of Lemma A4. Since noise terms are uniformly distributed and the payoff differential satisfies action single-crossing, the Lemma follows immediately from the proof to (Goldstein and Pauzner, 2005, Theorem 1).

Lemma A5. For any strategy sb(·) played by bank creditors, the rollover game between government creditors has a unique equilibrium in threshold strategies. Moreover, there are no equilibria in non-threshold
strategies.

Proof of Lemma A5. Since the payoff differential satisfies properties (1) to (6) in Claim A2, the Lemma follows immediately from (Morris and Shin, 2003, Proposition 2.2).

Proof of Proposition 3. From the proof of Proposition 2 follows that each game has a unique equilibrium
in threshold strategies. That is, for given x^ g, there exists a unique x^b that satisfies Equation (10) and for
given x^b, there exists a unique x^ g that satisfies (11). To see this directly, fix x^ g. Due to the existence of
dominance regions there exist x^ b and x^ b such that b(x^b, x^ g, x^b) < 0 for any x^b < x^ b, and b(x^b, x^ g, x^b) > 0 for any x^b > x^ b. Similarly, for g(x^ g, x^b, x^ g). Since b(·) and g(·) are continuous they both cross the x-axis at least once. To show that there is exactly one threshold signal, it suffices to show that b(x^b, x^ g, x^b) is strictly increasing in x^b and g(x^ g, x^b, x^ g) is strictly increasing in x^ g.
The derivative of g(·) with respect to x^ g is given by

g(x^ g, x^b, x^ g) = D g > 0, x^ g 1 + 2g

(A27)

where we have used

^ g = 1 x^ g 1 + 2g

b .

37

Next, consider the derivative of b with respect to x^b. Observe first that ^b(x^b) = Nb(Nb + 2b)-1

and (1 - ^b(x^b)) = 2b(Nb + 2b)-1. Moreover, if b < ^b, then ^ g/x^b = - Nbg(b(1 + 2g))-1. Let ^Tg :=

(x^ g

+ g)(1 + 2g)-1,

so

that

we

can

write

^ g(x^ g, x^b, b)

=

^

T g

+

Nbg 1+2 g

b-x^ b+b Nb +2b

,

while

^ g(x^ g, x^b, x^b

- b)

=

^Tg .

Using these facts and definitions, the derivative of b(·) with respect to x^b is given by

b x^b, x^ g, x^b x^ b

= Db 2b



1 - ^b(x^b)

+  ^b(x^b) 2b  g

g 1

dv -

^ g(x^ g,x^b,^b)

g

g
dv -
^ g(x^ g,x^b,x^b-b)

^b

^ g(·)  x^b du

x^b-b g



= Db + Nb + 2b 2bg

Nb Nb + 2b

0g +  g - ^ g(^b) - 0g +  g - ^Tg

+

Nb2g (Nb - x^b + b) 1 + 2g Nb + 2b

= ((Nb + 2b)g)-1 g Db - (g - ^Tg ) + 2b

Nb 2 g 1 + 2g

1 - Nb Nb + 2b

(Nb - x^b + b)

Now observe that gDb -

(g - ^Tg ) = g

Db -

(

g

-^

T g

)

g

> 0 since Db >

and

(g-^Tg ) g

1

because

it

is

a

probability. Furthermore Nb + b - x^b  0 because the existence of an upper dominance region implies that

x^ b

is

bounded

above

by

Nb + b.

Thus,

b(x^b,x^ g,x^b)
x^ b

> 0.

The existence of functions fb and f g follows by applying the implicit function theorem to Equations

(10) and (11). The slopes of the two functions are given by

We have fb > 0, since and f g < 0, because

f

b(x^ g

)

=

-

b/x^ g b /x^ b

and

f

g(x^ b

)

=

-

 

g/x^ b g/x^ g

.

b ^b 1 = - du < 0,
x^ g 2b x^b-b g

(A28)

 g =-

Dg Nb



x^b 2bb(1 + 2g) x^b

^ b (x^ b )
(u + b - x^b) du
x^ b-b

  - x^b

^ b (x^ b )
(u + b - x^b) du
x^ b-b

= (^b + b - x^b)

1 - ^b x^ b

> 0,

since

^b x^ b

=

Nb Nb +2b

< 1.

Lemma A6. The signs of the derivatives of the critical signals x^b and x^ g with respect to parameters { , Nb, b0, 0g} are given by

dx^ g > 0 and dx^b  0 dd

dx^b > 0, and dx^ g > 0

dNb

dNb

dx^ b db0

<0

and

dx^ g db0

<0

dx^ b d0g

<0

and

dx^ g d0g

> 0.

Proof of Lemma A6.

Let  = (

, Nb, b0, 0g) with typical element k.

The total effects

dx^ b dk

and

dx^ g dk

can be

found by applying the implicit function theorem to the set of equations

g(x^ g, x^b, ) = 0 b(x^b, x^ g, ) = 0

38

The Jacobian of this system is given by

J=

b x^ bg x^ b

b x^ g  g

=

(+) (+)

(-) (+)

,

x^ g

and thus its determinant is positive, |J| > 0. The total effects can be computed as

dx^b =

- -

b kg k

b x^ g  g x^ g

dk |J|

=

-

b k

 g x^ g

+

b x^ g

 g k

.

|J|

and

dx^ g = dk

b x^ b

-

b k

b x^ g

-

 g k

|J|

=

-

 g k

b x^ b

+

 g x^ g

b k

.

|J|

The partial derivatives with respect to are given by

b

1 ^b 1 g

= dvdu -

^b g Nb (u + b - x^ b) du

 2b x^b-b g ^g(u)

2b x^b-b b(1 + 2g)

g

1 ^b =
2bg x^b-b

g
dv
^ g(u)

-

g Nb b(1 + 2g)

(u + b

- x^b)

du

1 =
2b  g

^b x^ b-b

g

-

^

T g

-

2g Nb b(1 + 2g)

(u

+

b

-

x^ b )

du

= ^b - x^b + b 2b

g - ^Tg

2 +

g Nb(x^b - b) - 2

g Nb(^b + x^ b - b)

g

gb(1 + 2g)

2gb(1 + 2g)

= ^b - x^ b + b g - ^Tg + g Nb(x^ b - b - ^b) 2b g gb(1 + 2g)

= ^b - x^b + b g - ^ g(^b)  0, 2b g

where we have used the abbreviation ^g(u) := ^g(x^ g, x^b, u). Furthermore,

 g =

-D g

^b g Nb(u + b - x^ b) du

 2gb -b b(1 + 2g)

= -Dg Nb

^b u + g - x^ b du < 0.

b(1 + 2g) x^b-b 2b

Given the signs of Equations (A31) and (A32), it follows from Equations (A29) and (A30) that

dx^ g > 0 and dx^b  0. dd Condition (12) in the text can be derived by explicitly calculating

¯ b ¯ g ¯ b ¯ g -+.
 x^ g x^ g 

Using Equations (A27), (A28), (A31) and (A32), we obtain

- D g ^b - x^ b + b

1 + 2g

2b

g - ^ g(^b) + ^b - x^b + b

Dg Nb

^b u + b - x^ b du,

g 2b gb(1 + 2g) x^b-b 2b

which is negative if and only if

Nb b

^b x^ b-b

u

+ b - 2b

x^ b

du

<

g

-

^g (^b

),

(A29) (A30)
(A31) (A32)

39

which is condition (12). The derivatives with respect to Nb are given by

b 1 Nb = (Nb + 2b)2

-Db +

g - ^ g(^b) g

- 2 (Nb + b - x^b) g(1 + 2g) (Nb + 2b)

(Nb + 2b)2 + Nb(Nb + 4b)

and

 g =-

Dg

Nb 2b(1 + 2g)b

^b -b

(u

+

b

-

x^ b )du

+

2b(x^b + b) (Nb + 2b)2

^b - x^b + b

< 0.

Given the signs of Equations (A33) and (A34), it follows from Equations (A29) and (A30) that

<0 (A33)
(A34)

dx^b > 0, and dx^ g  0.

dNb

dNb

To

show

that

dx^ g dNb

> 0,

we

calculate

g b g b -+.
Nb x^b x^b Nb

Using Equations (??), (A28), (A33) and (A34), we obtain



^b

+ b - x^b 4b

+ Nb(x^b

+ b)

-

Nb Nb + 2b

x^ b + b Nb + 2b

-

2 Nbg(^b + b - x^ b)2 42bg(Nb + 2b)(1 + 2g

)

,

where



:=

Db-

-^ g (^b ) g

Nb +2b

.

Since

Nb



1,

we

have

Nb(x^b + b) >

Nb Nb + 2b

x^b + b . Nb + 2b

Moreover,



^b + b - x^b 4b

-

2 Nbg(^b + b - x^ b)2 42bg(Nb + 2b)(1 + 2g)

>

0

  > 2 Nbg(^b + b - x^b) bg(Nb + 2b)(1 + 2g)

 Db -



-

^

T g

+

g

2 Nbg(^b + b - x^ b) > b(1 + 2g)g

2 Nbg(^b + b - x^ b) bg(1 + 2g)

 Db -

 - ^Tg > 0. g

We

thus

have

-

 g Nb

b x^ b

+

 g x^ b

b Nb

> 0,

which

implies

dx^ g dNb

> 0.

Finally, the derivatives with respect to b0 and 0g are given by

b

^b(x^b) 1 g

0g = 2b

xnb -b

2g

dv du > 0,
^ g(x^ g,x^b,u)

b b0 = 0,  g 0g = 0,

 g b0

=

Dg Nb (1 + 2g)2b

^b u + b - x^ b > 0. -b 2b

Combining these with Equations (A29) and (A30), we obtain

dx^ b db0

< 0,

dx^ b d0g

< 0,

dx^ g db0

< 0,

dx^ g d0g

> 0.

40

Proof of Corollary 1. Suppose = ~ and condition (12) holds when evaluated at ~. This implies that dx^b( ~)/d < 0.
The derivative of the left­hand side of condition (12) is given by

Nb ^b u + b - x^ b du - Nb · ^b + b - x^ b 2b dx^ b ,

b x^b-b

2b

b 2b Nb + 2b d

which is positive by the supposition that (12) holds. Consider the derivative of the right­hand side with respect to . It is given by

dx^ g
-d

- g Nb(^b + b - x^b) +

g Nb

2b dx^b ,

1 + 2g

b(1 + 2g)

b(1 + 2g) Nb + 2b d

which is negative by the supposition that (12) holds.

Proof of Lemma 1. Observe that for given b, total guarantee payments are given by

Nb 2b

n x^ b

+b

du

if b < ^b .

0 else

Hence, whenever b  0, x^b  ^b and the integral collapses to zero. But then, the guarantee does not

appear anymore in the government's default condition and the threshold for government default converges

to ^g = Cg/D g, as in the canonical model. The probability of a government default can then be calculated

as Pg  Pr

g < ^g

=

C g/D g+ g g

.

The critical bank creditor's indifference condition can be explicitly written as

¯ b(x^b,

x^ g)

=

Db(x^b + 2b) Nb + 2b

+

(g - Tg )(b - xb + b) -  g 2b

g Nb(b - xb + b)2 - 1 = 0. 4bg(1 + 2g)

Observe that b - xb +b = 2b(Nb - xb +b)/(Nb +2b). Substituting this into the indifference condition and taking the limit b  0 leads to
¯ b(xb) = Db xb + (1 - Pg) (Nb - xb) - Nb = 0,

which can be solved for the critical signal,

xb

= b

=

Nb(1 - Db -

(1 - Pg)) . (1 - Pg)

(A35)

Proof of Lemma 2. We obtain from Equation (A35)

b 

=

Nb(1 - Pg)(1 - Db) (1 - (1 - Pg))2

<

0.

The probability of a systemic crisis can be computed as

q( ) = Pg × Pb( ),

with Pb(

)

=

b + b b

.

Since

Pg

does

not

depend

on

, the derivative of the cost of crises measure with respect

to can then be computed as

K(

)

=

(1 - Pg)b

Pb 

+

P

g

(1

-

g

)

Pb 

.

Substituting

Pb = 1  b

Nb(1 - Pg)(1 - Db) (1 - (1 - Pg))2

gives the expression in the text.

41

SFB 649 Discussion Paper Series 2013
For a complete list of Discussion Papers published by the SFB 649, please visit http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de.

001
002 003 004 005 006
007
008 009
010 011 012
013 014
015 016
017
018 019

"Functional Data Analysis of Generalized Quantile Regressions" by
Mengmeng Guo, Lhan Zhou, Jianhua Z. Huang and Wolfgang Karl Härdle, January 2013. "Statistical properties and stability of ratings in a subset of US firms" by
Alexander B. Matthies, January 2013. "Empirical Research on Corporate Credit-Ratings: A Literature Review" by Alexander B. Matthies, January 2013. "Preference for Randomization: Empirical and Experimental Evidence" by
Nadja Dwenger, Dorothea Kübler and Georg Weizsäcker, January 2013. "Pricing Rainfall Derivatives at the CME" by Brenda López Cabrera, Martin Odening and Matthias Ritter, January 2013. "Inference for Multi-Dimensional High-Frequency Data: Equivalence of
Methods, Central Limit Theorems, and an Application to Conditional Independence Testing" by Markus Bibinger and Per A. Mykland, January 2013.
"Crossing Network versus Dealer Market: Unique Equilibrium in the Allocation of Order Flow" by Jutta Dönges, Frank Heinemann and Tijmen R. Daniëls, January 2013. "Forecasting systemic impact in financial networks" by Nikolaus Hautsch,
Julia Schaumburg and Melanie Schienle, January 2013. "`I'll do it by myself as I knew it all along': On the failure of hindsightbiased principals to delegate optimally" by David Danz, Frank Hüber,
Dorothea Kübler, Lydia Mechtenberg and Julia Schmid, January 2013. "Composite Quantile Regression for the Single-Index Model" by Yan Fan, Wolfgang Karl Härdle, Weining Wang and Lixing Zhu, February 2013. "The Real Consequences of Financial Stress" by Stefan Mittnik and Willi
Semmler, February 2013. "Are There Bubbles in the Sterling-dollar Exchange Rate? New Evidence from Sequential ADF Tests" by Timo Bettendorf and Wenjuan Chen, February 2013.
"A Transfer Mechanism for a Monetary Union" by Philipp Engler and Simon Voigts, March 2013. "Do High-Frequency Data Improve High-Dimensional Portfolio
Allocations?" by Nikolaus Hautsch, Lada M. Kyj and Peter Malec, March 2013. "Cyclical Variation in Labor Hours and Productivity Using the ATUS" by Michael C. Burda, Daniel S. Hamermesh and Jay Stewart, March 2013.
"Quantitative forward guidance and the predictability of monetary policy ­ A wavelet based jump detection approach ­" by Lars Winkelmann, April 2013.
"Estimating the Quadratic Covariation Matrix from Noisy Observations: Local Method of Moments and Efficiency" by Markus Bibinger, Nikolaus Hautsch, Peter Malec and Markus Reiss, April 2013. "Fair re-valuation of wine as an investment" by Fabian Y.R.P. Bocart
and Christian M. Hafner, April 2013. "The European Debt Crisis: How did we get into this mess? How can we get out of it?" by Michael C. Burda, April 2013.

SFB 649, Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

SFB 649 Discussion Paper Series 2013
For a complete list of Discussion Papers published by the SFB 649, please visit http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de.
020 "Disaster Risk in a New Keynesian Model" by Maren Brede, April 2013. 021 "Econometrics of co-jumps in high-frequency data with noise" by Markus
Bibinger and Lars Winkelmann, May 2013. 022 "Decomposing Risk in Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium" by Hong
Lan and Alexander Meyer-Gohde, May 2013. 023 "Reference Dependent Preferences and the EPK Puzzle" by Maria Grith,
Wolfgang Karl Härdle and Volker Krätschmer, May 2013. 024 "Pruning in Perturbation DSGE Models - Guidance from Nonlinear Moving
Average Approximations" by Hong Lan and Alexander Meyer-Gohde, May 2013. 025 "The `Celtic Crisis': Guarantees, transparency, and systemic liquidity risk" by Philipp König, Kartik Anand and Frank Heinemann, May 2013.
SFB 649, Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

