BERLIN

SFB 6 4 9 E C O N O M I C R I S K

SFB 649 Discussion Paper 2014-029
Information Risk, Market Stress and Institutional
Herding in Financial Markets: New Evidence Through the Lens of a
Simulated Model
Christopher Boortz* Stephanie Kremer**
Simon Jurkatis*** Dieter Nautz**
* DIW Berlin, Germany ** Freie Universit‰t Berlin, Germany *** Humboldt-Universit‰t zu Berlin, Germany
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".
http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de ISSN 1860-5664
SFB 649, Humboldt-Universit‰t zu Berlin Spandauer Straﬂe 1, D-10178 Berlin

Information Risk, Market Stress and Institutional Herding in Financial Markets:
New Evidence Through the Lens of a Simulated Model

Christopher Boortz
DIW Berlin
Simon Jurkatis
Humboldt-Universita®t zu Berlin

Stephanie Kremer
Freie Universit®at Berlin
Dieter Nautz
Freie Universita®t Berlin

May 20, 2014

Abstract
This paper employs numerical simulations of the Park and Sabourian (2011) herd model to derive new theory-based predictions for how information risk and market stress influence aggregate herding intensity. We test these predictions empirically using a comprehensive data set of highfrequency and investor-specific trading data from the German stock market. Exploiting intra-day patterns of institutional trading behavior, we confirm that higher information risk increases both buy and sell herding. The model also explains why buy, not sell, herding is more pronounced during the financial crisis.
Keywords: Herd Behavior, Information Risk, Financial Crisis, Institutional Trading, Market Microstructure Model
JEL classification: D81, D82, G14
Corresponding author: Freie Universita®t Berlin, Department of Economics, Boltzmannstraﬂe 20, D-14195 Berlin, Germany, Phone: +49 30 838 51399, E-Mail: dieter.nautz@fu-berlin.de. Financial support from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) via CRC 649 "Economic Risk", from the Einstein Foundation Berlin via the Berlin Doctoral Program in Economics and Management Science (BDPEMS) and the German Institute for Economic research Berlin (DIW Berlin) is gratefully acknowledged. We are grateful to the German Federal Financial Supervisory Authority (BaFin) for providing the data. Comments from participants of the annual meetings of the German Finance Association in Hannover, the Southern Economics Association in New Orleans, the European Financial Management Association in Reading and the International Finance and Banking Society in Nottingham and, particularly, from Andreas Park and Georg Weizsa®cker are gratefully acknowledged. Earlier versions of this paper circulated under the title "Herding in financial markets: Bridging the gap between theory and evidence".

1 Introduction
Herd behavior by investors can be a significant threat to the functioning of financial markets. The distorting effects of herding range from informational inefficiency to increased stock price volatility, or even bubbles and crashes. This paper derives two theory-based predictions for how information risk and market stress influence herding intensity that are tested with high-frequency and investor-specific trading data from the German stock market. We focus on information risk, defined as the probability of trading with a counterparty who holds private information about an asset (Easley et al. (1996)), since the presence of information asymmetries is a necessary condition for herd behavior. To date, however, it is not clear how herding intensity reacts to changes in information risk. A better understanding of this relationship could enhance a financial regulator's ability to identify herds. In light of the recent financial crisis, our second focus is on how herd behavior is affected by market stress, that is, situations in which investors are both pessimistic and uncertain about the stock's value. While herding certainly has the potential to create such market stress, it is not obvious whether the reverse relationship holds, but if it does, its existence threatens to create vicious cycles of economic downturns and high volatility regimes.
Building on Glosten and Milgrom (1985) and Easley and O'Hara (1987), the literature on information risk deals with estimating the information content of trades, see e.g. Hasbrouck (1991), Easley et al. (1996) and Easley et al. (1997). The effects of information risk on herding intensity, however, are underresearched.1 While the proba-
1An exception is Zhou and Lai (2009) who provide evidence that herding is positively related to information risk measured by probability of informed trading (PIN), see e.g. Easley et al. (1997). The idea underlying the PIN measure is that there will be a distinct trading pattern on days when information events occur. More specifically, informed trading is possible only on days with information events. Since, moreover, information is not noisy, i.e. the information can never be wrong, days with information events (i.e. high information risk) are characterized by a strong accumulation of (informed) traders on one side of the market. The Lakonishok et al. (1992) measure employed by Zhou and Lai (2009) identifies herding also as the accumulation of traders on one side of the market. As a consequence, we would expect a positive relationship between PIN and the Lakonishok et al. (1992) herding measure by construction. The same should be true of the herding measure introduced by Sias (2004). Therefore, our estimations of information risk are not based on the PIN measure.
1

bility of informed trading is a key parameter in financial market herd models, compare e.g. Avery and Zemsky (1998) and Park and Sabourian (2011), to date these models have not been exploited to discover the impact of information risk on herding intensity. This is surprising, since the effects of information risk on herding intensity are far from obvious. On the one hand, an increase in information risk increases the average information content of an observed trade. As a consequence, traders update their beliefs more quickly and those investors that are susceptible to herding are more easily swayed to follow the crowd. On the other hand, increased information risk amplifies the market maker's adverse selection problem, compare Easley et al. (2002). Given the higher probability of trading at an informational disadvantage, the market maker quotes larger bid-ask spreads which tends to prevent potential herders from trading. Understanding which of these counteracting effects dominates could facilitate the detection of herds.
The impact of market stress on herd behavior has not been analyzed by the theoretical herding literature, either. Typically, herd models focus on the reverse relationship. For example, Park and Sabourian (2011) demonstrate that price paths tend to be more volatile in the presence of herd behavior. Agent based models proposed by, for example, Lee (1998) and Egu¥iluz and Zimmermann (2000) show that herd behavior contributes to fat tails and excess volatility in asset returns. A notable exception is Avery and Zemsky (1998), who show that herding is possible provided multiple sources of uncertainty exist. Their model does not imply, however, that more uncertainty actually leads to more herding. The prevalent unidirectional focus of the theoretical literature is particularly puzzling in light of the mixed evidence regarding the impact of market stress on herding intensity. Chiang and Zheng (2010) and Christie and Huang (1995) find that herding increases during times of market stress, whereas Kremer and Nautz (2013a,b) find that herding in the German stock market slightly decreased during the recent financial crisis, which is similar to the results of Hwang and Salmon (2004) for herding intensity during the Asian and the Russian crisis in the 1990s.
We base our theoretical analysis on the financial market herd model of Park and
2

Sabourian (2011), which can be viewed as a generalization of the seminal work of
Avery and Zemsky (1998).2 One important extension is the broader set of different
information structures that allows a differentiated discussion of how information ex-
ternalities may contribute to herd behavior under various market conditions including
scenarios of high and low market stress. Relating investor herding to the shape of the
information structure instead of to multi-dimensional uncertainty, Park and Sabourian
(2011) identify more explicitly those situations in which the potential for herding is
high. Consequently, the Park and Sabourian (2011) framework is more appropriate for
finding and explaining high degrees of herding. In fact, experimental evidence suggests
that the Avery and Zemsky (1998) framework discovers little or no herd behavior,
see Cipriani and Guarino (2009).3 In contrast, experiments based on the Park and
Sabourian (2011) model find that herding in financial markets can be substantial, see
Park and Sgroi (2012). In Park and Sabourian (2011), herding is triggered by infor-
mation externalities that an investment decision by one agent imposes on subsequent
agents' expectations about the asset value, see Bikhchandani et al. (1992) and Banerjee
(1992).4 Therefore, this model is a natural candidate for investigating the impact of
information risk on herding intensity.5
2Similar to the bulk of the theoretical literature, both models define herd behavior as a switch in an agent's opinion toward that of the crowd, see Brunnermeier (2001). As herders ignore their private information, herd behavior is informationally inefficient and thus has the potential to distort prices and destabilize markets.
3Avery and Zemsky (1998) includes three model setups. The first setup extends the traditional herd model of Bikhchandani et al. (1992) by a price mechanism that prevents herd behavior. The most prominent experimental tests of the Avery and Zemsky (1998) framework, Drehmann et al. (2005) and Cipriani and Guarino (2005), focus on this setup and confirm the theoretical prediction of no herding. Cipriani and Guarino (2009), on the other hand, focus on one of the setups in which herd behavior is predicted, but again find only little evidence of it.
4Alternative drivers for herd behavior include reputational concerns as well as investigative herding. Reputational herd models modify the agents' objective functions such that their decisions are affected by positive externalities from a good reputation, see e.g. Scharfstein and Stein (1990), Graham (1999) and Dasgupta et al. (2011). Investigative herd models examine conditions under which investors may choose to base their decisions on the same information resulting in correlated trading behavior, see e.g. Froot et al. (1992) and Hirshleifer et al. (1994). For a survey of the early herding literature see Devenow and Welch (1996). For an in-depth discussion of how the herding literature ties into the social learning literature see Vives (1996).
5Other financial market herd models such as Lee (1998), Chari and Kehoe (2004), and Cipriani and Guarino (2008), investigate how investor herding is related to transaction costs, endogenous timing of trading decisions, and informational spillovers between different assets, respectively.
3

The history dependence of trading decisions in financial market herd models drastically impedes derivation of analytical results on herding intensity. This may explain why financial market herd models have not yet been exploited to make empirically testable predictions on the impact of information risk and market stress. Moreover, standard empirical herding measures, including Lakonishok et al. (1992) and Sias (2004), examine herding intensity on an aggregate level.6 Therefore, a theory-guided empirical analysis of herd behavior requires theoretical predictions on herding intensity aggregated over investor groups, time periods, and heterogeneous stocks, which further complicates the derivation of analytical results.
In this paper we circumvent these problems by simulating the Park and Sabourian (2011) model for more than 13,000 different parameterizations that broadly cover the theoretical parameter space, generating about 2.6 billion trades for analysis. We obtain two testable hypotheses on aggregate herding intensity. First, an increase in information risk should result in a symmetric increase of buy and sell herding intensity. Second, high market stress should be found to have an asymmetric effect on herding intensity: while buy herding is predicted to surge during crisis periods, the simulation results suggest that sell herding intensity increases only moderately.
Both our predictions are confirmed by particularly appropriate intra-day, investorspecific data provided by the German Federal Financial Supervisory Authority (BaFin). Empirical studies typically have to rely on either investor-specific but low-frequency data (e.g. Lakonishok et al. (1992), Sias (2004), Wermers (1999)), or on high-frequency but anonymous transaction data (compare, e.g., Barber et al. (2009)). Kremer and Nautz (2013a) regress daily herding measures on size, volatility, and other stock characteristics to analyze the causes of herding. The current paper expands on these studies
6In Lakonishok et al. (1992), herding of a group of investors is measured as the tendency to accumulate on one side of the market. Specifically, the authors test whether the share of net buyers in individual stocks significantly deviates from the average share of net buyers across all stocks of the considered stock index. Sias (2004) investigates whether the accumulation of investors on one side of the market persists over time by measuring the cross-sectional correlation of the share of net buyers over adjacent time periods.
4

in two important aspects. First, similar to the bulk of the empirical literature, the empirical analyses of Kremer and Nautz (2013a,b) are only loosely connected to the theoretical herding literature. In contrast, the simulation-based predictions derived in this paper allow us to interpret evidence on herding through the lens of a financial market herd model. Second, to the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first to analyze intra-day herding intensity using investor-specific data. In line with herding theory, the use of intra-day data is particularly appropriate for measuring herd behavior induced by information externalities. Measuring herding at lower frequencies may bias the results because new information might have reached the market in the meantime, creating a new environment for investor behavior. The use of investor-specific data is particularly important as we need to directly identify transactions by each trader in order to determine whether an investor follows the observed actions of other traders. To assess herding empirically, we employ the herding measure proposed by Sias (2004). The dynamic nature of the Sias measure makes it particularly appropriate for the analysis of high-frequency data. Interestingly, the Sias measure has not yet been applied to intra-day data.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we review the model of Park and Sabourian (2011). We define information risk as well as market stress and provide an initial qualitative assessment of their effect on herding intensity. Section 3 introduces the simulation setup and derives testable hypotheses regarding the role of information risk and market stress for aggregate herding intensity. Section 4 introduces the empirical herding measure. Section 5 presents the data and the empirical results. Section 6 concludes.
5

2 Information Risk and Market Stress in a Herd Model
2.1 The Model
Park and Sabourian (2011) consider a sequential trading model a` la Glosten and Milgrom (1985), consisting of a single asset, both informed and noise traders, and a market maker. The model assumes rational expectations and common knowledge of its structure.
The Asset: There is a single risky asset with unknown fundamental value V  {V1, V2, V3}, where V1 < V2 < V3. Without loss of generality, let V1 = 0, V2 = 1 and V3 = 2. The prior distribution 0 < P (V = Vj) < 1 for j = 1, 2, 3 determines the degree of public uncertainty Var(V ) about the asset's true value before trading has started. The asset is traded over T consecutive points in time. In Section 3, we choose T = 100 for the model simulation.
The Traders: Traders arrive in the market one at a time in a random exogenous order and decide to buy, sell, or not to trade one unit of the asset at the quoted bid and ask prices. Traders are either informed traders or noise traders. The fraction of informed traders is denoted by µ. Informed traders base their decision to buy, sell, or not to trade on their expectations regarding the asset's true value. In addition to publicly available information consisting of the history of trades Ht, t = 1, . . . , T , and the risky asset's prior distribution P (V ), informed traders form their expectations based on a private signal S  {S1, S2, S3} regarding the true value of the asset. They buy (sell) one unit of the asset if their expected value of the asset E[V | S, Ht] is strictly greater (smaller) than the ask (bid) price quoted by the market maker. Otherwise, informed traders choose not to trade. In the empirical herding literature, institutional investors are viewed as a typical example for informed traders. In contrast to informed traders, noise traders trade randomly, that is, they decide to buy, sell, or not to trade with
6

equal probability of 1/3. pt denotes the price at which the asset is traded in period t.

The Private Signal: The distribution of the private signals S1, S2, S3 is conditional

on the true value of the asset. Denote the conditional signal matrix by P (S = Si | V =

Vj) = (pij)i,j=1,2,3. For each column j, the matrix is leftstochastic, i.e.

3 i=1

pij

=

1.

For each row i,

3 j=1

pij

is

the

likelihood

that

an

informed

trader

receives

the

signal

Si. An informed trader's behavior is critically dependent on the shape of her private

signal. Specifically, Park and Sabourian (2011) define a signal Si to be

∑ monotonically decreasing iff pi1 > pi2 > pi3, ∑ monotonically increasing iff pi1 < pi2 < pi3, ∑ U-shaped iff pi1 > pi2 and pi2 < pi3.

Traders with monotone signals are confident about the asset's true value and rarely change their trading decision. That is, an optimistic trader with an increasing signal will only buy or hold, whereas a pessimistic trader with a decreasing signal will only sell or hold. In contrast, traders with U-shaped signals face a high degree of uncertainty and may decide to buy, sell or hold. U-shaped traders are more easily swayed to change their initial trading decision as they observe trade histories Ht with a strong accumulation of traders on one side of the market. In fact, Park and Sabourian (2011) show that a U-shaped signal is a necessary condition for herding. Park and Sabourian (2011) also introduce hill-shaped signals which are necessary for contrarian behavior. Since contrarian behavior is self-defeating, its destabilizing effects are limited and thus of only secondary importance for financial markets. Consequently, we exclude hill-shaped signals from our analysis. In the following, we assume that S1 is monotone decreasing, S2 is U-shaped and S3 is monotone increasing. The conditional private signal distribution P (S | V ) determines the degree of information asymmetry between market maker and informed traders. The less noisy the signal, the higher the informational advantage of the informed traders.
7

The Market Maker: Trading takes place in interaction with a market maker who quotes a bid and an ask price. The market maker only has access to public information and is subject to perfect competition such that he makes zero-expected profit. Accordingly, he sets the ask (bid) price equal to his expected value of the asset given a buy (sell) order and the public information. Formally, he sets askt = E[V |Ht  {at = buy}] and bidt = E[V |Ht  {at = sell}], where at is the action of a trader in period t  2 and Ht := {(a1, p1), ..., (at-1, pt-1)}.
2.2 Herding Intensity
Park and Sabourian (2011) describe herding as a "history-induced switch of opinion [of a certain informed trader] in the direction of the crowd." Thus, only informed traders can herd. More precisely, a herding trade is defined as follows:
Definition 1: Herding Let bt (st) be the number of buys (sells) observed until period t. An informed trader with signal S buy herds in t at history Ht if the following three conditions hold:
(BH1) E[V |S] < E[V ], i.e. an informed trader with signal S does not buy initially and is more pessimistic regarding the asset's true value than is the market maker.
(BH2) E[V |S, Ht] > askt, an informed trader with signal S buys in t. (BH3) bt > st, i.e. the history of trades contains more buys than sells: the crowd buys.
Analogously, an informed trader with signal S sell herds in period t at history Ht if and only if (SH1) E[V |S] > E[V ], (SH2) E[V |S, Ht] < bidt, and (SH3) bt < st hold simultaneously.
Note that (BH1) and (SH1) imply that either buy or sell herding is possible for a given model parameterization. Our definition of herding is less restrictive than the one
8

used in Park and Sabourian (2011), who, for example, define buy herding as an extreme switch from selling initially to buying. In our definition, buy herding also includes switches from holding to buying, provided that the trader leans toward selling initially, compare (BH1) and (BH2).7 As a consequence, herd traders always act informationally inefficiently as their trading decisions contradict their private information. From an empirical perspective, including switches from holding to selling or buying is important as these actions may drive amplified stock price movements.
(BH3) and (SH3) also differ slightly from Park and Sabourian (2011) in which, for example, buy herding requires E[V |Ht] > E[V ]. This condition is based on the idea that prices rise when there are more buys than sells. However, this only holds if the prior distribution of the risky asset P (V ) is symmetric around the middle state V2, i.e. P (V1) = P (V3).8 In fact, for asymmetric P (V ), it is possible that even though a history Ht contains more buys than sells, the price of the asset goes down (i.e., E[V |Ht] < E[V ]). From an empirical perspective, asymmetric prior distributions P (V ) should not be ruled out a priori. Therefore, we modify the herding definition to ensure that a herder always follows the crowd.
The above definition enables us to decide whether or not a particular trade by a single investor at a specific point in time is a herd trade. In contrast, empirical herding measures are based on a number of trades by different investors observed over a certain time interval, see, e.g., Lakonishok et al. (1992) and Sias (2004). Since we aim to derive theory-based predictions on herd behavior that can be tested empirically, we need to aggregate herding in the model over time as well as over investors. We aggregate over time by considering all relevant trades from t = 1, . . . , T . We aggregate over investors by calculating herding intensity for the whole group of informed traders. Therefore, we define herding intensity (HI) as the share of herding trades in the total number of
7According to Park and Sabourian (2011), such an extension of the herding definition is theoretically legitimate. They focus on the stricter version to be consistent with earlier theoretical work on herding.
8Note that Park and Sabourian (2011) assume symmetry of the risky asset's prior distribution throughout their paper (see Park and Sabourian (2011), p.980).
9

informed trades.

Definition 2: Herding Intensity Let bTin and sTin be the number of buys and sells of informed traders observed until period T , i.e. during the entire time interval under consideration. Let bTh and shT denote the corresponding number of buy and sell herding trades. Then,

Buy herding intensity (BHI)

=:

bTh bTin + siTn

Sell herding intensity (SHI)

=:

shT biTn + sTin

Standard empirical herding measures including those of Lakonishok et al. (1992) and Sias (2004) are calculated using only buys and sells, see Section 4. To be consistent with empirical herding measures, we exclude holds when calculating the number of informed trades in the definition of theoretical herding intensity.

2.3 Information Risk and Market Stress in the Herd Model
2.3.1 Information Risk
In Easley et al. (1996), information risk is the probability that a trade is executed by an informed trader. Hence, information risk coincides with the parameter µ, the fraction of informed traders, in the Park and Sabourian (2011) model. From a theoretical perspective, the effect of changes in µ on herding intensity is ambiguous. On the one hand, herding may increase with information risk because a higher µ implies that there are more potential herders (U-shaped traders) in the market. Indeed, due to the self-enforcing nature of herd behavior a higher µ contributes to longer-lasting herds and, hence, stronger herding intensity. Moreover, a higher fraction of informed traders implies that the average information content of a single trade increases. As

10

a consequence, informed traders update their beliefs more quickly and those traders that are susceptible to herd behavior are more easily swayed to change from buying to selling and vice versa. On the other hand, a rise in µ may also reduce herding intensity. Since the average information content per trade increases in µ, herds tend to break up more quickly as traders stop herding after observing fewer trades on the opposite side of the market. Higher information risk further amplifies the market maker's adverse selection problem, compare Easley et al. (2002). Given the higher probability of trading at an informational disadvantage, the market maker quotes larger bid-ask spreads in order to avoid losses. The larger spread, in turn, requires potential herders to observe much stronger accumulation of traders on one side of the market before they alter their trading decision.

2.3.2 Market Stress

Times of high market stress and crisis periods are typically understood as situations

where investors are confronted with a deteriorating economic outlook and increased

uncertainty about stock values, compare e.g. Schwert (2011). A negative economic

outlook in the Park and Sabourian (2011) model is captured by low expectations re-

garding the asset's true value E[V ]. A low E[V ] not only describes a deteriorated

outlook by the public but also a high degree of pessimism among informed traders.

First, lower public expectations E[V ] result in lower private expectations E[V |S] for

all informed traders. Second, there tend to be more decreasing signals (pessimists)

among informed traders as well as fewer increasing signals (optimists) for low E[V ]

than for high E[V ]. Uncertainty in the Park and Sabourian (2011) can be sorted into

two types: public uncertainty and informed trader uncertainty. Public uncertainty is

given by the variance of the risky asset Var(V ). Informed trader uncertainty (IU) is

measured by the probabilities that informed traders receive a U-shaped signal condi-

tional on Vj, j = 1, 2, 3: IU :=

3 j=1

p2j

.

The higher IU, the more traders there are

in the market with U-shaped signals and, hence, the higher the uncertainty among

11

informed traders.9 In light of the recent financial crisis, we are particularly interested in comparing herding intensity in times of high market stress with the herding intensity predicted for more optimistic periods.

The overall effect of market stress on herding intensity is not obvious and crucially depends on model parameterization. In particular, buy and sell herding intensity may react differently to changes in market stress. Consider, for example, an increase in market stress due to a decrease in E[V ]. More specifically, assume a shift of probability mass from V3 to lower values. First, if, for a given model parameterization, buy herding is possible (and hence sell herding is impossible), a marginal reduction in P (V3) would result in a decrease in buy herding intensity, whereas sell herding intensity would remain constant at 0. Similarly, if sell herding is possible for a given model parameterization (and buy herding impossible), a marginal reduction in P (V3) would result in an increase in sell herding intensity while buy herding intensity would remain unaffected. This converse effect on buy and sell herding intensity is due to the fact that a reduction in P (V3) diminishes the probability of buy-dominated trade histories and increases the probability of sell-dominated histories. Hence, potential sell (buy) herders are more (less) likely to be confronted with a trade history that sways them into herding. Second, if the U-shaped signal is positively biased, i.e., P (S2 | V1) < P (S2 | V3), a reduction of P (V3) diminishes the number of U-shaped traders in the market and, hence, tends to decrease buy as well as sell herding intensity. Finally, for a whole range of model parameterizations, a lower E[V ] may even contribute to an increase in buy herding intensity and a decrease in sell herding intensity. Since a lower E[V ] implies that more informed traders are initially inclined to sell, the number of potential sell herders declines. Correspondingly, buy herding becomes more likely.

9Note that an increase in Var(V ) may reduce the number of U-shaped traders in the market.

This effect is not necessarily offset by an increase in IU. One could circumvent this issue by ad-

ditionally imposing that the total probability that an informed trader receives a U-shaped signal

P (S2) =

3 j=1

p2j

P

(V

= Vj) must also be high in times of market stress.

Since this does not af-

fect the results of our simulation, we choose not to complicate the model by adding this characteristic

to the uncertainty definition.

12

These complex and partly counteracting effects, in conjunction with the historydependent updating of beliefs, lead to a low analytical tractability of herding intensity in the Park and Sabourian (2011) model, see the Appendix. This particularly applies to the empirically relevant case where herding intensity is considered as an average over a set of stocks with heterogeneous characteristics. In the following, therefore, empirically testable predictions about the effects of information risk and market stress on average herding intensity are derived by numerically simulating the model over a broad set of model parameterizations.

3 Simulation of the Herd Model for a Heterogeneous Stock Index

3.1 Average Herding Intensity

Empirical studies on herd behavior typically derive results for herding intensity as an average for a large set of stocks and over certain time intervals. The stocks under consideration are likely to differ in their characteristics implying that each stock is described by a distinct parameterization for the fraction of informed traders, the prior distribution of the asset, and the distribution of the private signals. In accordance with the empirical literature, we are particularly interested in herding intensity defined as an average over a broad range of model parameterizations that reflects the heterogeneity in stock market indices. Specifically, we define average herding intensity as follows:

Definition 3: Average Herding Intensity For a given set of model parameterizations I and length T of the trading period, average buy herding intensity is defined as

BHI =

iI wiBHIi , iI wi

13

where BHIi stands for the buy herding intensity obtained for model parameterization i and the weights wi = biTn,i + sTin,i correspond to the number of informed trades observed for that parameterization. The definition for average sell herding intensity SHI follows analogously.
Weights wi ensure that average herding intensity is not biased upward by simulation outcomes with a low number of informed trades.10
3.2 The Simulation Setup
We choose µ, the fraction of informed traders, from
M = {0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9}.
Accordingly, we simulate the model for |M| = 9 different levels of information risk. In the German stock market, the share of institutional (i.e. informed) trading for the sample period ranges from 0.2 to 0.7, compare Kremer and Nautz (2013a).
The prior distribution of the risky asset P (V ) is chosen from
3
P = {P (V )  {0.1, 0.2, . . . , 0.9}3 : P (Vi) = 1}.
i=1
Since we impose that V takes each value V1 = 0, V2 = 1, V3 = 2 with positive probability, P (Vi) cannot be 0.9, which gives us |P| = 36 different prior distributions.
The conditional signal distribution P (S|V ) = (pij)i,j=1,2,3 has to be chosen from the space of leftstochastic 3-by-3 matrices. As before, we discretize this space by
10Consider, for example, a situation where we observe a herding intensity of 0.5 as 2 out of 4 informed trades are herd trades. Now assume that for another simulation the herding intensity is 0 as 0 out of 16 informed trades are herd trades. In this case, the unweighted average of simulated herding intensities would be 0.25, which overestimates herding intensity as only 2 out of 20 trades were herd trades across the whole sample.
14

imposing a grid ranging from 0.1 to 0.9. All elements of P (S|V ) are positive, that is, all signals are noisy in the sense that an informed trader cannot with certainty rule out any of the three possible states for V . Following Park and Sabourian (2011), there are always optimists (p31 < p32 < p33), pessimists (p11 > p12 > p13), and U-shaped (p21 > p22, p22 < p23) traders in the market, see Section 2.1. Finally, informed traders tend to be well-informed, that is, if the bad state V = V1 realizes, most of the informed traders will be pessimistic and few are optimistic (p11 > p21 > p31) and vice versa for V = V3 (p13 < p23 < p33). This implies that the set of simulated signal structures (C) can be summarized as follows:
C = {P (S|V ) = (pij)i,j=1,2,3 leftstochastic : pij  {0.1, 0.2, . . . , 0.9}, p11 > p21 > p31, p13 < p23 < p33, p11 > p12 > p13, p31 < p32 < p33, p21 > p22, p22 < p23, },
which leads to |C| = 41 different signal structures used in the simulation.
Considering all combinations, one obtains the simulation set  := M ◊ P ◊ C, where || = 9 ∑ 36 ∑ 41 = 13284. Each element  = (µ, P (V ), P (S|V ))   describes the characteristics of a specific stock.11 Park and Sabourian (2011) derive upper bounds for µ that have to hold in order for herding to be possible. One can check that these upper bounds are never binding for   , i.e. in each of the following simulations, either sell or buy herding is possible (see Park and Sabourian (2011), pp. 991-992, 1011-1012). Each stock is traded over T = 100 points of time. For each stock, the simulation is repeated 2, 000 times which produces more than 2.6 billion simulated trades for analysis.12
11In practice, stock characteristics  may not be constant over time. For example, the Deutsche Bank share before the financial crisis is likely to have different characteristics than the Deutsche Bank share during the crisis.
12Matlab codes are available on request.
15

Figure 1: Information risk and herding intensity

(a) Sell Herding

(b) Buy Herding

Notes: SHI and BHI are plotted against information risk. On the ordinate we plot average herding intensity. Information risk µ is plotted along the horizontal. Average herding intensity is calculated as the weighted cross-sectional average for the simulated SHI and BHI of stocks contained in {µ}◊P ◊C. The weights correspond to the observed number of informed trades. The boxplots show the variation across 2,000 simulations of average herding intensity for a fixed level of information risk µ.
3.3 Simulation Results: Information Risk and Average Herding Intensity
To discover the impact of information risk on average herding intensity, we fix µ  M and calculate average herding intensity as the cross-sectional average over all parameterizations in {µ} ◊ P ◊ C, where |{µ} ◊ P ◊ C| = 1 ∑ 36 ∑ 41 = 1, 476.
Figure 1 shows the comparative statics for average sell and buy herding intensity with respect to changes in information risk µ. The simulation results clearly indicate that SHI and BHI symmetrically increase with information risk. The boxplots demonstrate that the simulation results are very stable. Indeed, the variation of average herding intensity for a given level of information risk is relatively low, whereas its increase is rather steep as µ goes up. This particularly applies to the empirically relevant range of µ  [0.2, 0.7]. Only as µ approaches 1, do SHI and BHI level out and exhibit higher variations.
16

The model simulation shows that the increasing effects of a rise in information risk on herding intensity dominate the decreasing effects. Only as the share of informed traders surpasses 80%, does the adverse selection problem of the market maker begin to impair market liquidity severely enough that trading among the potential herders breaks down. The ambiguity of their signal prevents them from paying the high premiums now demanded by the market maker via large bid-ask spreads. We summarize the simulation-based insight from Figure 1 as follows:
Hypothesis 1: Information Risk and Herding Intensity Average sell and buy herding intensity increase in information risk.
3.4 Simulation Results: Market Stress and Average Herding Intensity
For the analysis of the effects of market stress we define two distinct classes of stocks and compare the average herding intensity of each. The first class comprises all stocks that have high market stress characteristics; the second class all stocks that show low market stress characteristics. In line with the definition of market stress developed in Section 2.3.2, a simulated stock    is subject to high market stress if it exhibits both above-average uncertainty and below average E[V ]. Correspondingly, low market stress stocks are defined by below-average uncertainty and above-average E[V ]. The averages are the respective medians of the simulated model parameterizations.13 We compare the cross-sectional average SHI and BHI over all high market stress stocks with the SHI and BHI obtained for all low market stress stocks.
The simulation results for the impact of market stress on average sell and buy herding intensity are shown in Table 1. As expected, both sell and buy herding are
13Specifically, we obtain the median degree of pessimism (public uncertainty) by calculating E[V ] (Var(V )) for each of the 36 simulated prior distributions P (V )  P and then determine their median. Correspondingly, we calculate the median informed uncertainty over the set of simulated signal structures C.
17

Table 1: The effects of market stress on average herding intensity

Low market stress High market stress

SHI
0.0351
(0.0029)
0.0382
(0.0023)

BHI
0.0306
(0.0020)
0.0635
(0.0038)

Notes: This table reports the simulated average sell (SHI) and buy herding intensity (BHI) for stocks under high market stress and stocks under low market stress. Standard deviations are in parentheses. Welch's t-test reveals that SHI as well as BHI increase significantly during times of high market stress for usual significance levels. Out of the 13,284 simulated stocks, 1,368 classify as high market stress and 1,008 as low market stress. Average herding intensities are calculated as the weighted cross-sectional averages of the simulated SHI and BHI for stocks in each respective class. The figures in the table are the weighted average and the weighted standard deviation of 2,000 iid simulated outcomes of SHI and BHI under high and low market stress, respectively. For all calculations, the weights correspond to the observed number of informed trades.

more pronounced during times of high market stress. Interestingly, however, the rise in buy herding intensity is greater than that of sell herding intensity. This puzzling asymmetry can be explained by disentangling the effects of an increase in uncertainty and pessimism.
Table 2 shows that SHI and BHI symmetrically increase with uncertainty. High public uncertainty is associated with lower prior probabilities for the middle state of the risky asset. Since informed traders receiving U-shaped signals discount the probability for the middle state anyway, high public uncertainty amplifies their tendency to form strong beliefs that only the extreme states of the risky asset can be true. As they rule out one of the extreme states based on the observed trading history, they quickly alter their trading decisions toward that of the crowd. This effect is intensified if private uncertainty is also high since such leads to a larger share of U-shaped traders. Since this argument applies equally to sell and buy herding, the increasing effect of uncertainty on herding intensity is symmetric.
In contrast, Table 3 reveals, that a reduction in E[V ] affects SHI and BHI in opposite ways. While increased pessimism contributes to buy herding, it significantly
18

Table 2: The effects of uncertainty on average herding intensity

Low uncertainty High uncertainty

SHI
0.0373
(0.0018)
0.0557
(0.0022)

BHI
0.0340
(0.0016)
0.0555
(0.0022)

Notes: This table reports the simulated SHI and BHI for stocks with high and low uncertainty respectively. Standard deviations are in parentheses. Welch's t-test reveals that SHI as well as BHI increase significantly during times of high uncertainty for usual significance levels. Out of the 13,284 simulated stocks, 3,078 exhibit high and, 2,268 low, uncertainty. Average herding intensities are calculated as the weighted cross-sectional averages of the simulated SHI and BHI for stocks in each respective class. The figures in the table are the weighted average and the weighted standard deviation of 2,000 iid simulated outcomes of SHI and BHI under high and low uncertainty, respectively. For all calculations, the weights correspond to the observed number of informed trades.

reduces sell herding. This result is driven by the fact that during times of grim economic outlook, most informed traders sell anyway. Herd behavior, however, requires a trader to alter her initial trading decision. For sell herding to be possible, for instance, the trader has to be initially inclined to buy the asset. Only informed traders receiving U-shaped signals with strong biases toward the high state of the risky asset (i.e., p21 << p23) may still be inclined to buy initially for low E[V ]. As E[V ] drops, so does the number of simulated signal structures in C that exhibit a sufficiently strong positive bias of the U-shaped trader for sell herding to be possible. By the same line of reasoning, BHI increases with low E[V ]. We emphasize that the results in Table 3 do not contradict strong accumulations of traders on the sell side during times of deteriorated economic outlook. The Park and Sabourian (2011) model predicts that such a consensus in trade behavior is not driven by a switch in traders' opinion toward that of the crowd but is due to a high share of equally pessimistic traders all acting on similar information. Such correlation of trade behavior is called spurious or unintentional herding in the literature, compare e.g. Kremer and Nautz (2013a) and Hirshleifer and Hong Teoh (2003).
The simulation shows that the positive effect of increased uncertainty on sell herding
19

Table 3: The effects of economic outlook on average herding intensity

High E[V ] Low E[V ]

SHI
0.0502
(0.0010)
0.0370
(0.0016)

BHI
0.0357
(0.0010)
0.0504
(0.0016)

Notes: This table reports the simulated SHI and BHI for stocks where traders show high and low degrees of pessimism respectively. Standard deviations are in parentheses. Welch's t-test reveals a highly asymmetric effect for sell and buy herding. Indeed, SHI decreases as pessimism increases while BHI increases with the degree of pessimism. The results are significant at all usual significance levels. Out of the 13,284 simulated stocks, 5,904 stocks exhibit high and low degrees of pessimism. Average herding intensities are calculated as the weighted cross-sectional averages of the simulated SHI and BHI for stocks in each respective class. The figures in the table are the weighted average and the weighted standard deviation of 2,000 iid simulated outcomes of SHI and BHI under high and low uncertainty, respectively. For all calculations, the weights correspond to the observed number of informed trades.

dominates the negative effect of increased pessimism. This leads to an overall slight increase in SHI during times of high market stress. In contrast, the complementary effect of uncertainty and pessimism on buy herding results in a surge of BHI during times of high market stress. We consolidate these simulation results in the following
Hypothesis 2: Herding Intensity and Market Stress In times of high market stress, the increase in buy herding is more pronounced than that of sell herding.

4 Empirical Herding Measure
Simulating a herd model allows us to determine for each trade whether herding actually occurred. As a result, the exact herding intensity can be calculated for each model simulation. In an empirical application, it is much more difficult to decide whether or not a trader herds since researchers have no access to private signals.
The dynamic herding measure proposed by Sias (2004) is designed to explore
20

whether (institutional) investors follow each others' trades by examining the corre-

lation between the traders' buying tendency over time. The Sias herding measure,

therefore, is particularly appropriate for high-frequency data. Similar to the static

herding measure proposed by Lakonishok et al. (1992), the starting point of the Sias

measure is the number of buyers as a fraction of all traders. Specifically, consider a

number of Nit institutions trading in stock i at time t. Out of these Nit institutions,

a number of bit institutions are net buyers of stock i at time t. The buyer ratio brit is

then

defined

as

brit

=

.bit
Nit

According

to

Sias

(2004),

the

ratio

is

standardized

to

have

zero mean and unit variance:

it

=

brit - bØrt , (brit)

(1)

where (brit) is the cross-sectional standard deviation of buyer ratios across I stocks at

time t. The Sias herding measure is based on the correlation between the standardized

buyer ratios in consecutive periods:

it = ti,t-1 + it.

(2)

The cross-sectional regression is estimated for each time t. In the second step, the Sias

measure for herding intensity is calculated as the time-series average of the estimated

coefficients: Sias =

.T
t=2

t

T -1

The Sias methodology further differentiates between investors who follow the trades of others (i.e., true herding according to Sias (2004)) and those who follow their own trades. For this purpose, the correlation is decomposed into two components:

t = (it, i,t-1) =

1 (I - 1)(brit)(bri,t-1)

I i=1

Nit (Dnit - bØrt)(Dni,t-1 - bØrt-1)

n=1

NitNi,t-1

+

1 (I - 1)(brit)(bri,t-1)


I Nit


Ni,t-1



(Dnit

-

bØrt)(Dmi,t-1

-

bØrt-1) 

,

i=1 n=1 m=1,m=n

NitNi,t-1

(3)

21

where I is the number of stocks traded. Dnit is a dummy variable equal to 1 if institution n is a buyer in i at time t and 0 otherwise. Dmi,t-1 is a dummy variable equal to 1 if trader m (who is different from trader n) is a buyer at time t - 1. Therefore, the first part of the measure represents the component of the cross-sectional inter-temporal correlation that results from institutions following their own strategies when buying or selling the same stocks over adjacent time intervals. The second part indicates the portion of correlation resulting from institutions following the trades of others over adjacent time intervals. A positive correlation that results from institutions following other institutions, that is, the latter part of the decomposed correlation, can be regarded as evidence of herd behavior. In the subsequent empirical analysis, we therefore focus on the latter term of Equation (3), which we denote by Sias. According to Choi and Sias (2009), Equation (3) can be further decomposed to distinguish between the correlations associated with "buy herding" (bri,t-1 > 0.5) and "sell herding" (bri,t-1 < 0.5).
5 Empirical Results
5.1 Data
The data are from the German Federal Financial Supervisory Authority (BaFin). Under Section 9 of the German Securities Trading Act, all credit institutions and financial services institutions are required to report to BaFin any transaction in securities or derivatives that trade on an organized market. These records make it possible to identify all relevant trade characteristics, including the trader (the institution), the particular stock, time, number of traded shares, price, and the volume of the transaction. Moreover, the records specify on whose behalf the trade was executed, that is, whether the institution traded for its own account or on behalf of a client that is not a financial institution. Only institutions that fall under Section 9 of the German Securities Trading Act are allowed to submit trade orders to German trading platforms. Therefore, the data are a comprehensive repository of all trades executed on German stock exchanges
22

during the sample period. Since this study is concerned with institutional trades, particularly those of financial institutions, we restrict our attention to the trading of own accounts, that is, those cases where a bank or financial services institution is clearly the originator of the trade. We exclude institutions trading exclusively for the purpose of market making. We also exclude institutions that are formally mandated as designated sponsors, i.e., liquidity providers, for a specific stock. For each stock, there are usually about two institutions formally mandated as market maker. The institutions are not completely dropped from the sample (unless they have already been excluded due to engaging in purely market maker business), but only for those stocks for which they act as designated sponsors.14 We are particularly interested in the herding behavior of institutional investors because they are more likely to be informed compared to, for example, retail investors. Moreover, institutional investors are the predominant class in the stock market, with the power to move the market and impact prices, particularly if they herd.
The analysis focuses on shares listed on the DAX 30 (the index of the 30 largest and most liquid stocks), where stocks are selected according to the index compositions at the end of the observation period on March 31, 2009. Following the empirical literature, we require that at least five institutions were active in the market at each trading interval. Using data from July 2006 to March 2009 (698 trading days), we are able to investigate whether trading behavior has changed during the financial crisis. Over the sample period, there are 1,120 institutions engaging in proprietary transactions. Among those 1,120 traders, 1,044 trade on the DAX 30 stocks.
14The designated sponsors for each stock are published at http://www.deutsche-boerse.com. For more information about the data, see Kremer and Nautz (2013a,b).
23

5.2 Information Risk and Herding Intensity in the German Stock Market
The higher the number of informed traders active in a market, the higher the probability of informed trading and, thus, information risk. According to Hypothesis 1, average herding intensity increases with information risk, reflected in the parameter µ, the fraction of informed traders. In the following, we use two empirical proxies for the level of information risk: (i) the number of active institutional traders and (ii) the share of the institutional trading volume.
According to Foster and Viswanathan (1993) and Tannous et al. (2013), the fraction of informed traders and, thus, information risk cannot be expected to be constant over a trading day. To account for intra-day trading patterns in the German stock market, we divide each trading day into 17 half-hour intervals. A trading day is defined as the opening hours of the trading platform Xetra (9 a.m. to 5:30 p.m.), on which the bulk of trades occur. The use of half-hour intervals ensures that the number of active institutions is sufficiently high for calculating intra-day herding measures.15 The first two columns of Table 4 show how both empirical proxies for information risk are distributed within a day. For both measures of trading activity, institutional traders are more active during the opening and closing intervals.
To investigate the intra-day pattern of herding intensity, we calculate the Sias herding measure for each half-hour interval separately. The results of this exercise are also shown in Table 4. The third column shows for each interval the overall Sias measure (Sias), which is based on the average correlation of buy ratios between two intervals (see Equation (2)). Following Sias (2004), this correlation may overstate the true herding intensity because it does not account for correlation resulting from traders who follow themselves. It is a distinguishing feature of our investor-specific data that they allow addressing that problem even on an intra-day basis. In particular, Column 4 reports
15For sake of robustness, we also divide the trading day into nine one-hour intervals, but our main results do not depend on this choice. For brevity, results are not shown but are available on request.
24

Table 4: Information risk and herding intensity within a trading day

Time

Information risk T raders T rading V olume

Herding intensity Sias Sias

09:00 - 09:30

25.33

6.73

--

09:30 - 10:00 10:00 - 10:30 10:30 - 11:00 11:00 - 11:30 11:30 - 12:00 12:00 - 12:30 12:30 - 01:00 01:00 - 01:30 01:30 - 02:00 02:00 - 02:30 02:30 - 03:00 03:00 - 03:30 03:30 - 04:00 04:00 - 04:30 04:30 - 05:00 05:00 - 05:30

21.05 15.75 22.88 19.58 18.72 17.96 17.08 17.36 16.57 17.85 18.90 18.32 20.42 20.70 20.74 22.50

5.34 2.57 6.73 4.51 4.15 3.77 3.39 4.31 3.28 3.96 4.63 4.42 6.43 6.98 7.64 10.13

25.92
(0.23)
28.59
(0.22)
30.43
(0.29)
34.30
(0.31)
33.98
(0.29)
33.91
(0.30)
33.81
(0.25)
33.28
(0.24)
34.00
(0.28)
34.74
(0.25)
33.38
(0.24)
34.21
(0.26)
34.19
(0.28)
35.65
(0.28)
34.62
(0.27)
32.94
(0.28)

9.92
(0.26)
7.54
(0.24)
7.85
(0.23)
9.98
(0.22)
8.24
(0.23)
7.83
(0.24)
6.96
(0.21)
7.84
(0.21)
8.56
(0.21)
8.60
(0.26)
8.29
(0.26)
9.31
(0.26)
10.60
(0.26)
12.86
(0.26)
11.90
(0.26)
12.53
(0.26)

Notes: The table shows how information risk and herding intensity evolves over the trading day. T raders denotes the average number of active institutional traders; T rading V olume refers to the average percentage share of the daily trading volume of institutional investors. For instance, on average, 6.73% of the daily institutional trading volume occured between 9 a.m. and 9:30 a.m. The columns do not add to 1 because we focus on the predominant German platform Xetra R , where trading takes place from 9 a.m. till 5.30 p.m. CET, while the opening period for the German stock exchange at the floor ends at 8 p.m. Sias and Sias represent the overall and the adjusted Sias herding measure (in percent), where the latter only considers institutions that follow the trades of others, see Equation (3). Standard errors are in parentheses.

the correlation due to investors following the trades of others (Sias) (see Equation (3)).
Table 4 offers several insights into the intra-day pattern of institutional herding. First, both Sias measures provide strong evidence for the presence of herding for each half-hour interval of the trading day. Second, intra-day herding measures are significantly larger than those obtained with low-frequency data, compare Kremer and Nautz (2013a,b). Third, the sizable differences between Sias and Sias highlight the importance of using investor-specific data.
How is the observed intra-day variation of information risk related to the intraday herding intensity of institutional investors? In line with the intuition of Park and Sabourian (2011), the Sias herding measure depends on the trading behavior in two subsequent time periods. On the one hand, high information risk in t - 1 leads institutional investors to believe that there is a high degree of information contained in previously observed trades. On the other hand, high information risk in t ensures that there is a high number of potential herders active in the market. Both effects contribute positively to herding intensity in period t. Therefore, for each time interval herding intensity is compared with the average information risk of the corresponding time intervals. Figure 2 reveals a strong intra-day co-movement between both proxies of information risk and Sias. In fact, we find overwhelming evidence in favor of Hypothesis 1: the rank-correlation coefficient between the average trading volume and the corresponding Sias measure is 0.80, which is both economically and statistically highly significant. Very similar results are obtained for the number of active institutional traders, where the correlation coefficient equals 0.67.16
Note that the peaks in Sias at market opening and following the opening of the U.S. market at 3:30 p.m. ≠ 4 p.m. correspond with high activity by informed traders, suggesting that at market openings there is a lot of information contained in observed
16These results can be confirmed using standard correlation coefficients, which are also large and significant at all conventional levels for both empirical proxies of information risk. Note that a rankcorrelation coefficient might be more appropriate than the standard correlation coefficient, since it accounts for the potentially non-linear relation between information risk and herding intensity suggested by the numerical simulation of the herd model (see Figure 1).
26

Figure 2: Information Risk and Average Herding Intensity within a Trading Day
trades on which subsequent traders herd. This confirms the experimental findings of Park and Sgroi (2012), who observe that traders with relatively strong signals trade first, while potential herders delay.
5.3 Herding Intensity in the German Stock Market Before and During the Financial Crisis
According to Hypothesis 2, both sell and buy herding should increase in times of high market stress when uncertainty increases and markets become more pessimistic about the value of the asset. However, the increase in sell herding is predicted to be smaller than the one in buy herding. In our application, a natural candidate to test this hypothesis is the outbreak of the financial crisis. To investigate the effect of the crisis
27

Table 5: Herding Intensity - Before and During the Financial Crisis

Buy Herding Pre-crisis period Crisis period
Sell Herding Pre-crisis period Crisis period

Sias
14.37
(0.37)
13.87
(0.35)
18.87
(0.23)
15.65
(0.25)

Sias
4.10
(0.10)
5.09
(0.11)
5.41
(0.09)
5.74
(0.08)

Notes: This table reports adjusted (Sias) and unadjusted (Sias) herding measures based on half-hour intervals estimated separately for the pre-crisis and the crisis period. The Sias measures are further decomposed into buy and sell herding components (see Section 4). Standard errors are in parentheses.

on herding intensity, we calculate sell and buy herding measures for the crisis and the pre-crisis period separately. The pre-crisis period ends on August 9, 2007 as this is widely considered to be the starting date of the financial crisis in Europe, see, e.g., European Central Bank (2007) and Abbassi and Linzert (2012).
Herding measures obtained before and during the crisis are displayed in Table 5. The results confirm the predictions of the simulated model. The statistically significant yet small increase in sell herding (5.74 > 5.41) is well in line with Hypothesis 2 as is the more pronounced surge in buy herding (5.09 > 4.10).
Apparently, in times of deteriorated economic outlook when traders are exposed to recurring bad news, a small but unexpected accumulation on the buy side is quickly interpreted as good news about an asset's value and induces investors to follow the crowd (as small as it may be) into the alleged investment opportunity. Such behavior--in light of Hypothesis 2--is by no means purely based on investor sentiment or irrationality, but may be perfectly rational. In line with our theoretical results, the increase in sell
28

herding during the crisis period indicates that the high uncertainty effect dominates the low expectation effect discussed in Section 3. The increase, however, may also be explained by reasons outside the model. If asset prices start to fall, selling may become necessary in order for institutional traders to meet regulatory requirements. The resulting accumulation of institutional traders on the sell side of the market may upward bias the sell herding intensity detected by the empirical herding measure. Yet, the small increase in sell herding intensity in the German stock market during the crisis period indicates that these diluting effects of unintentional herding are not of particular relevance for our sample.
6 Concluding Remarks
Due to data limitations and a lack of testable, model-based predictions, the theoretical and the empirical herding literature are only loosely connected. This paper contributes tightening this connection. First, we derive theory-based predictions regarding the impact of information risk and market stress on herding intensity by numerically simulating the financial market herd model of Park and Sabourian (2011). We then test these predictions empirically using a comprehensive data set from the German stock market. As predicted by the model, we find that both buy and sell herding increase symmetrically with information risk. Our empirical results further show that the herd model can explain why buy and sell herding in the German stock market evolve asymmetrically in response to increased market stress induced by the financial crisis.
There are several interesting avenues for future research that will aid in further tightening the connection between the theoretical and empirical herding literature. For example, during crises periods, correlation across assets and contagious effects may play an important role in explaining investor behavior. Herd models, however, are typically single-asset models and are not designed to provide insights regarding herd intensity in a context of correlated assets and informational spillovers. Therefore, an
29

extension of herd models to a multiple asset setting would facilitate the interpretation of evidence based on aggregate herding measures. A second suggestion involves the design of empirical herding measures. The prevailing measures assess correlated trade behavior (see, e.g., Lakonishok et al. (1992), Sias (2004), Patterson and Sharma (2010)) and thus are able to detect the accumulation of investors on one side of the market. However, these measures do not reveal whether this consensus in trade behavior is actually due to true herding, that is, whether it is due to traders ignoring their private information and instead copying the behavior of others. As a result, correlated trading indicated by empirical herding measures is not necessarily a sign of inefficiency but could be a joint reaction to the same information or due to the use of similar risk models, see Kremer and Nautz (2013a). More work is needed to further our understanding to what extent and under which circumstances empirical herding measures actually detect true herding as understood by the theoretical literature.
30

References
Abbassi, P. and Linzert, T. (2012). The effectiveness of monetary policy in steering money market rates during the financial crisis, Journal of Macroeconomics 34(4): 945 ≠ 954.
Avery, C. and Zemsky, P. (1998). Multidimensional Uncertainty and Herd Behavior in Financial Markets, The American Economic Review 88(4): 724≠748.
Banerjee, A. V. (1992). A Simple Model of Herd Behavior, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(3): 797≠817.
Barber, B. M., Odean, T. and Zhu, N. (2009). Do Retail Trades Move Markets?, Review of Financial Studies 22(1): 151≠186.
Bikhchandani, S., Hirshleifer, D. and Welch, I. (1992). A Theory of Fads, Fashion, Custom, and Cultural Change as Informational Cascades, Journal of Political Economy 100(5): 992≠1026.
Brunnermeier, M. K. (2001). Asset Pricing Under Asymmetric Information, Oxford University Press.
Chari, V. and Kehoe, P. J. (2004). Financial crises as herds: overturning the critiques, Journal of Economic Theory 119(1): 128 ≠ 150.
Chiang, T. C. and Zheng, D. (2010). An empirical analysis of herd behavior in global stock markets, Journal of Banking and Finance 34(8): 1911 ≠ 1921.
Choi, N. and Sias, R. W. (2009). Institutional industry herding, Journal of Financial Economics 94(3): 469 ≠ 491.
Christie, W. G. and Huang, R. D. (1995). Following the pied piper: Do individual returns herd around the market?, Financial Analysts Journal 51(4): 31 ≠ 37.
31

Cipriani, M. and Guarino, A. (2005). Herd Behavior in a Laboratory Financial Market, The American Economic Review 95(5): 1427≠1443.
Cipriani, M. and Guarino, A. (2008). Herd Behavior and Contagion in Financial Markets, The B.E. Journal of Theoretical Economics (Contributions) 8(1): 1 ≠ 54.
Cipriani, M. and Guarino, A. (2009). Herd behavior in financial markets: An experiment with financial market professionals, Journal of the European Economic Association 7(1): 206≠233.
Dasgupta, A., Prat, A. and Verardo, M. (2011). The price impact of institutional herding, Review of Financial Studies 24(3): 892≠925.
Devenow, A. and Welch, I. (1996). Rational herding in financial economics, European Economic Review 40(3): 603≠615.
Drehmann, M., Oechssler, J. and Roider, A. (2005). Herding and Contrarian Behavior in Financial Markets: An Internet Experiment, The American Economic Review 95(5): 1403≠1426.
Easley, D., Hvidkjaer, S. and O'Hara, M. (2002). Is information risk a determinant of asset returns?, The Journal of Finance 57(5): pp. 2185≠2221.
Easley, D., Kiefer, N. and O'Hara, M. (1996). Cream-skimming or profitsharing? The curious role of purchased order flow, Journal of Finance 51(3): 811≠833.
Easley, D., Kiefer, N. and O'Hara, M. (1997). One day in the life of a very common stock, Review of Financial Studies 10(3): 805≠835.
Easley, D. and O'Hara, M. (1987). Price, trade size, and information in securities markets, Journal of Financial Economics 19(1): 69 ≠ 90.
Egu¥iluz, V. M. and Zimmermann, M. G. (2000). Transmission of information and herd behavior: An application to financial markets, Physical Review Letters 85(26): 5659≠ 5662.
32

European Central Bank (2007). The implementation of monetary policy since August 2007, Monthly Bulletin July: 75≠89.
Foster, F. D. and Viswanathan, S. (1993). Variations in Trading Volume, Return Volatility, and Trading Costs; Evidence on Recent Price Formation Models, The Journal of Finance 48(1): 187 ≠ 211.
Froot, K. A., Scharfstein, D. S. and Stein, J. C. (1992). Herd on the street: Informational inefficiencies in a market with short-term speculation, The Journal of Finance 47(4): 1461≠1484.
Glosten, L. R. and Milgrom, P. R. (1985). Bid, ask and transaction prices in a specialist market with heterogeneously informed traders, Journal of Financial Economics 14(1): 71 ≠ 100.
Graham, J. R. (1999). Herding among investment newsletters: Theory and evidence, The Journal of Finance 54(1): 237≠268.
Hasbrouck, J. (1991). Measuring the information content of stock trades, The Journal of Finance 46(1): 179≠207.
Hirshleifer, D. and Hong Teoh, S. (2003). Herd Behaviour and Cascading in Capital Markets: a Review and Synthesis, European Financial Management 9(1): 25≠66.
Hirshleifer, D., Subrahmanyam, A. and Titman, S. (1994). Security analysis and trading patterns when some investors receive information before others, The Journal of Finance 49(5): 1665≠1698.
Hwang, S. and Salmon, M. (2004). Market stress and herding, Journal of Empirical Finance 11(2): 585≠616.
Kremer, S. and Nautz, D. (2013a). Causes and consequences of short-term institutional herding, Journal of Banking and Finance 37(5): 1676 ≠ 1686.
33

Kremer, S. and Nautz, D. (2013b). Short-term Herding of Institutional Traders: New Evidence from the German Stock Market, European Financial Management 19(4): 730 ≠ 746.
Lakonishok, J., Shleifer, A. and Vishny, R. W. (1992). The impact of institutional trading on stock prices, Journal of Financial Economics 32(1): 23 ≠ 43.
Lee, I. H. (1998). Market Crashes and Informational Avalanches, Review of Economic Studies 65(4): 741≠759.
Park, A. and Sabourian, H. (2011). Herding and Contrarian Behaviour in Financial Markets, Econometrica 79(4): 973≠1026.
Park, A. and Sgroi, D. (2012). Herding, contrarianism and delay in financial market trading, European Economic Review 56(6): 1020 ≠ 1037.
Patterson, D. M. and Sharma, V. (2010). The Incidence of Informational Cascades and the Behavior of Trade Interarrival Times during the Stock Market Bubble, Macroeconomic Dynamics 14(S1): 111≠136.
Scharfstein, D. S. and Stein, J. C. (1990). Herd Behavior and Investment, The American Economic Review 80(3): pp. 465≠479.
Schwert, G. W. (2011). Stock volatility during the recent financial crisis, European Financial Management 17(5): 789≠805.
Sias, R. W. (2004). Institutional Herding, Review of Financial Studies 17(1): 165≠206.
Tannous, G., Wang, J. and Wilson, C. (2013). The intraday pattern of information asymmetry, spread, and depth: Evidence from the NYSE, International Review of Finance 13(2): 215≠240.
Vives, X. (1996). Social learning and rational expectations, Europen Economic Review 40(3 to 5): 589 ≠ 601.
34

Wermers, R. (1999). Mutual Fund Herding and the Impact on Stock Prices, The Journal of Finance 54(2): 581≠622.
Zhou, R. T. and Lai, R. N. (2009). Herding and information based trading, Journal of Empirical Finance 16(3): 388 ≠ 393.
35

A The History Dependence of Herding Intensity

Financial market herd models, including the model of Park and Sabourian (2011) , are not designed to provide closed-form solutions for expected herding intensity. In this appendix, we use two examples to demonstrate why numerical simulations are required for obtaining model-based results regarding the impact of information risk and market stress on herding intensity.
Even for a given model parameterization, model complexity prevents deriving a closed-form analytical formula for herding intensity. The herding definition depends on the market maker's quotes, askt and bidt, as well as the informed traders' expectations regarding the asset's true value E[V | S, Ht]. These quantities, in turn, depend on the whole history of trades until t. In fact, not only the number of observed buys, sells and holds but also their order affects expectations and quotes at time t. As a consequence, even for a given model parameterization, each history path would need to be analyzed separately to derive results on expected herding intensity.17
Let us illustrate this issue with a concrete numerical example. Assume the conditional signal matrix P (S | V ) to be

P (S | V ) S1 S2 S3

V1 = 0 0.6 0.3 0.1

V2 = 1 0.5 0.1 0.4

V3 = 2 0.1 0.4 0.5

The distribution of the risky asset is P (V ) = [0.3 0.4 0.3]. Multiplying P (S | V ) ∑ P (V ) yields the unconditional probabilities P (S) = [0.41 0.25 0.34] that a trader receives a signal S given that she is informed. Finally, the share of informed traders is set
17Given the sheer number of possible trading histories alone, an analytical derivation of SHI and BHI is not feasible even for relatively small T . For any length T of the history HT , there are 3T different history paths.
36

Figure 3: Trading decisions of U-shaped trader for µ = 0.5
(a) H1100 = {25 buys, 50 sells, 25 buys}
(b) H2100 = {25 sells, 50 buys, 25 sells}
to be µ = 0.5. Only informed traders receiving the U-shaped signal S2 can herd. Given that E[V ] = 1 < 1.12 = E[V | S2], the U-shaped trader can engage in sell herding only if she is inclined to buy initially.18 We discuss two distinct trading histories consisting of 100 trades and the exact same number of buys and sells. The only difference is the order in which the trades are observed. Let H1100 = {25 buys, 50 sells, 25 buys} and H2100 = {25 sells, 50 buys, 25 sells}. Figure 3 shows how a U-shaped trader would decide to trade at every time t = 1, ..., 100 for the respective trading histories.
18Note that S2 holds initially as the ask price ask0 = 1.18 quoted by the market maker prevents S2 from buying.
37

Note that the number of trades for which S2 sell herds differs for the two histories. Under H1100, S2 potentially sell herds between periods 51 and 85, i.e. 35 times.19 Under H2100, S2 potentially sell herds only 30 times. The share of U-shaped traders among the population of all traders is µP (S2) = 0.5 ∑ 0.25 = 0.125. Consequently, we expect to observe a total number of shT,1 = 0.125 ∑ 35 = 4.375 herding sells under H1100. Correspondingly, under H2100, we only have sTh,2 = 0.125 ∑ 30 = 3.75 expected herd sells. Furthermore, since µ = 0.5 and T = 100, we expect that both histories contain 50 informed trades.20 According to Definition 2.2, the sell herding intensity is SHI = shT /biTn + sTin. Plugging in the expected values for numerator and denominator that we just calculated, we obtain an expected sell herding intensity SHI1 = 4.375/50 = 0.0875 under H1100 and SHI2 = 3.75/50 = 0.75 under H2100.21 Finally note that the probability of observing these histories P (Hi100) is also different for i = 1, 2, since the probability of observing a certain trade (i.e., buy or sell) in t depends on the trading decisions of
the informed traders at t. This means, that in order to calculate an overall expected
herding intensity for the model parameterization above, we would need to analyze SHI and P (H100) for all 3100 possible history paths separately, a task well beyond our
current computational capacity. Even if we were able to calculate that number, we
still would not have a formula that tells us how SHI would react to changes in certain
model parameters such as µ. Indeed, one can illustrate the many counteracting effects
of a change in µ that result in quite different outcomes for specific trading histories and thus also prevent the derivation of analytical comparative static results.22

19Note that S2 does in fact start herding only in period 51, although she would already have decided

to sell in period 44. This is because the complete history does not contain more sells than buys until

period 51, which we demand in order to ensure that S2 actually follows the majority in the market. 20Note that for an arbitrary history, calculation of the expected number of informed trades is much

less straight forward since there is the possibility that informed traders hold and we hence have fewer informed trades than 50. Since H1100 and H2100 do not contain any holds, however, this is not an issue
here.

21Note,

that

since

numerator

and

denominator

are

clearly

correlated,

we

have

that

E

[

X Y

]

=

E [X ] E[Y ]

.

A

Taylor approximation of order 1, however, yields that the expectation of a ratio can be consistently

estimated by the ratio of the expectations. As a consequence, all equations should be understood as

approximations. An exact calculation of expected herding intensity would be even more complicated. 22A numerical example how an increase in µ would affect SHI for the above trading histories is

available on request or in our working paper version.

38

SFB 649 Discussion Paper Series 2014
For a complete list of Discussion Papers published by the SFB 649, please visit http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de.

001 002 003 004 005 006 007 008 009 010 011 012 013 014 015 016 017 018

"Principal Component Analysis in an Asymmetric Norm" by Ngoc Mai Tran, Maria Osipenko and Wolfgang Karl H‰rdle, January 2014. "A Simultaneous Confidence Corridor for Varying Coefficient Regression with Sparse Functional Data" by Lijie Gu, Li Wang, Wolfgang Karl H‰rdle and Lijian Yang, January 2014. "An Extended Single Index Model with Missing Response at Random" by Qihua Wang, Tao Zhang, Wolfgang Karl H‰rdle, January 2014. "Structural Vector Autoregressive Analysis in a Data Rich Environment: A Survey" by Helmut L¸tkepohl, January 2014. "Functional stable limit theorems for efficient spectral covolatility estimators" by Randolf Altmeyer and Markus Bibinger, January 2014. "A consistent two-factor model for pricing temperature derivatives" by Andreas Groll, Brenda LÛpez-Cabrera and Thilo Meyer-Brandis, January 2014. "Confidence Bands for Impulse Responses: Bonferroni versus Wald" by Helmut L¸tkepohl, Anna Staszewska-Bystrova and Peter Winker, January 2014. "Simultaneous Confidence Corridors and Variable Selection for Generalized Additive Models" by Shuzhuan Zheng, Rong Liu, Lijian Yang and Wolfgang Karl H‰rdle, January 2014. "Structural Vector Autoregressions: Checking Identifying Long-run Restrictions via Heteroskedasticity" by Helmut L¸tkepohl and Anton Velinov, January 2014. "Efficient Iterative Maximum Likelihood Estimation of HighParameterized Time Series Models" by Nikolaus Hautsch, Ostap Okhrin and Alexander Ristig, January 2014. "Fiscal Devaluation in a Monetary Union" by Philipp Engler, Giovanni Ganelli, Juha Tervala and Simon Voigts, January 2014. "Nonparametric Estimates for Conditional Quantiles of Time Series" by J¸rgen Franke, Peter Mwita and Weining Wang, January 2014. "Product Market Deregulation and Employment Outcomes: Evidence from the German Retail Sector" by Charlotte Senftleben-Kˆnig, January 2014. "Estimation procedures for exchangeable Marshall copulas with hydrological application" by Fabrizio Durante and Ostap Okhrin, January 2014. "Ladislaus von Bortkiewicz - statistician, economist, and a European intellectual" by Wolfgang Karl H‰rdle and Annette B. Vogt, February 2014. "An Application of Principal Component Analysis on Multivariate TimeStationary Spatio-Temporal Data" by Stephan Stahlschmidt, Wolfgang Karl H‰rdle and Helmut Thome, February 2014. "The composition of government spending and the multiplier at the Zero Lower Bound" by Julien Albertini, Arthur Poirier and Jordan RoulleauPasdeloup, February 2014. "Interacting Product and Labor Market Regulation and the Impact of Immigration on Native Wages" by Susanne Prantl and Alexandra SpitzOener, February 2014.

SFSBF6B4694, 9S,pSapnadnaduaeureSrtrSatﬂraeﬂ1e, 1D,-D10-1107187B8eBrleinrlin htthpt:t/p/:/s/fbs6fb4694.w9.iwwiiw.hiu.h-bue-brleinrl.idne.de
ThTishrisesreasrecahrcwhawsassupsuppoprtoerdtebdybtyhethDeeDuetsucthseche ForFsocrhsuchnugnsgesgmeeminesicnhsachftatfht rtohuroguhgthhethSeFSBF6B4694"9Ec"oEnconmoimc RicisRki"s.k".

SFB 649 Discussion Paper Series 2014
For a complete list of Discussion Papers published by the SFB 649, please visit http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de.
019 "Unemployment benefits extensions at the zero lower bound on nominal interest rate" by Julien Albertini and Arthur Poirier, February 2014.
020 "Modelling spatio-temporal variability of temperature" by Xiaofeng Cao, Ostap Okhrin, Martin Odening and Matthias Ritter, February 2014.
021 "Do Maternal Health Problems Influence Child's Worrying Status? Evidence from British Cohort Study" by Xianhua Dai, Wolfgang Karl H‰rdle and Keming Yu, February 2014.
022 "Nonparametric Test for a Constant Beta over a Fixed Time Interval" by Markus Reiﬂ, Viktor Todorov and George Tauchen, February 2014.
023 "Inflation Expectations Spillovers between the United States and Euro Area" by Aleksei Netsunajev and Lars Winkelmann, March 2014.
024 "Peer Effects and Students' Self-Control" by Berno Buechel, Lydia Mechtenberg and Julia Petersen, April 2014.
025 "Is there a demand for multi-year crop insurance?" by Maria Osipenko, Zhiwei Shen and Martin Odening, April 2014.
026 "Credit Risk Calibration based on CDS Spreads" by Shih-Kang Chao, Wolfgang Karl H‰rdle and Hien Pham-Thu, May 2014.
027 "Stale Forward Guidance" by Gunda-Alexandra Detmers and Dieter Nautz, May 2014.
028 "Confidence Corridors for Multivariate Generalized Quantile Regression" by Shih-Kang Chao, Katharina Proksch, Holger Dette and Wolfgang H‰rdle, May 2014.
029 "Information Risk, Market Stress and Institutional Herding in Financial Markets: New Evidence Through the Lens of a Simulated Model" by Christopher Boortz, Stephanie Kremer, Simon Jurkatis and Dieter Nautz, May 2014.
SFB 649, Spandauer Straﬂe 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

