BERLIN

SFB 6 4 9 E C O N O M I C R I S K

SFB 649 Discussion Paper 2005-042
Bank finance versus bond finance: what explains the differences between US and Europe?
Fiorella De Fiore* Harald Uhlig**
* European Central Bank ** Humboldt-Universit‰t zu Berlin, Deutsche Bundesbank,
CentER and CEPR
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".
http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de ISSN 1860-5664
SFB 649, Humboldt-Universit‰t zu Berlin Spandauer Straﬂe 1, D-10178 Berlin

Bank ...nance versus bond ...nance: what explains the
di§erences between US and Europe?
Fiorella De Fiorey European Central Bank
Harald Uhligz Humboldt Universit‰t zu Berlin, Deutsche Bundesbank, CentER and CEPR
This version: 1 August 2005
Abstract We present a dynamic general equilibrium model with agency costs, where heterogeneous ...rms choose among two alternative instruments of external ...nance - corporate bonds and bank loans. We characterize the ...nancing choice of ...rms and the endogenous ...nancial structure of the economy. The calibrated model is used to address questions such as: What explains di§erences in the ...nancial structure of the US and the euro area? What are the implications of these di§erences for allocations? We ...nd that a higher share of bank ...nance in the euro area relative to the US is due to lower availability of public information about ...rms'credit worthiness and to higher e¢ ciency of banks in acquiring this information. We also quantify the e§ect of di§erences in the ...nancial structure on per-capita GDP.
JEL Classi...cation: E20, E44, C68. Keywords: Financial structure, agency costs, heterogeneity. The views expressed here do not necessarily reect those of the European Central Bank or the Eurosystem. We thank participants at the SED meetings, at the conferences on Dynamic Macroeconomics in Hydra, on DSGE Models and the Financial Sector in Eltville, on Competition, Stability and Integration in European Banking in Brussels, and seminar participants at Bocconi University. We are grateful to our discussants, Jajit Chada, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, Andreas Schabert and Javier Suarez. This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk" and by the RTN network MAPMU. yDirectorate General Research, European Central Bank, Postfach 160319, 60066 Frankfurt am Main, Germany. Email: ...orella.de_...ore@ecb.int. Ph: +49-69-13446330. zSchool of Bus. & Econ., WiPol 1, Humboldt University, Spandauer Str. 1, 10178 Berlin, Germany. Email: uhlig@wiwi.hu-berlin.de. http://www.wiwi.hu-berlin.de/wpol. Ph: +49-30-2093 5927.
1

1 Introduction
This paper looks at the composition of the corporate sector's external ...nance as an important dimension through which credit market imperfections a§ect the macroeconomy. In the presence of agency costs, ...nancial intermediaries provide contractual arrangements that reduce the e§ects of information asymmetries between lenders and borrowers. This is achieved by o§ering alternative ...nancing instruments that best ...t the needs of individual borrowers. Each instrument di§ers in the cost imposed to lenders and borrowers and in the ability to reduce the macroeconomic e§ects of information asymmetries.
Empirical evidence suggests substantial di§erences in the ...nancial structure across countries. For instance, the traditional distinction between bank-based and market-based ...nancial systems applies to the euro area and the US. Investment of the corporate sector relies much more heavily on bank ...nance in the euro area than in the US. In 2001, bank loans to the corporate sector amounted to 42.6 percent of GDP in the euro area, and to 18.8 percent in the US. Conversely, outstanding debt securities of non-...nancial corporations and stock market capitalization amounted respectively to 6.5 and 71.7 percent in the euro area, and to 28.9 and 137.1 percent in the US.1
In this paper, we introduce heterogeneous ...rms and alternative instruments of external ...nance in a dynamic general equilibrium model with agency costs. We characterize the optimal choice of ...rms among alternative instruments and derive the endogenous ...nancial structure. The model can be used as a laboratory to answer questions such as: What generates di§erences in ...nancial structures among countries? What are the implications of these di§erences for allocations?
Existing models with agency costs (e.g. Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997, 1998, 2001), Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999), Christiano, Motto and Rostagno (2004) and Faia (2002)) do not allow to explain observed di§erences in ...nancial structures, as they do not distinguish between alternative instruments of external ...nance. We introduce two types of ...nancial intermediaries - commercial banks and capital mutual funds - into an otherwise standard model with credit frictions and information asymmetries. Each type of ...nancial intermediaries (here onwards FIs) o§ers a di§erent intra-period contractual arrangement to provide external ...nance to ...rms. Firms experience a sequence of idiosyncratic productivity
1 See Ehrmann et al (2003), Table 14.1.
2

shocks, the ...rst being realized before ...rms take ...nancing decisions. Therefore, when choosing the source of external ...nance ...rms are heterogeneous in the risk they face of defaulting at the end of the period. Banks and capital mutual funds (CMFs) di§er because banks are willing to spend resources to acquire information about ...rms in ...nancial distress, while CMFs are not. Conditional on the information obtained, banks give ...rms the option to obtain loans and produce or to abstain from production and keep their initial net worth (except for an information acquisition fee to be paid to banks). The fact that banks spend resources to acquire information implies that bond ...nance is less costly than bank ...nance. Nonetheless, ...nancing through bonds is a risky choice for ...rms, because a situation of ...nancial distress can only be resolved with liquidation and with the complete loss of the ...rm's initial net worth.
The contribution of the paper is twofold. First, we present a dynamic general equilibrium model where the ...nancial structure of the economy can be endogenously derived from the ...rms' optimal choice of the ...nancing instrument. Our model can easily embed ...rms'heterogeneity in the risk of default without giving up tractability. The dynamics of the economy can be described by a system of aggregate equilibrium conditions similar to those arising in models without such heterogeneity. Second, we calibrate the model in steady state to replicate key di§erences in the ...nancial structure of the US and the euro area. We ...nd that a higher share of bank ...nance in the euro area relative to the US is due to lower availability of public information about ...rms'credit worthiness and to higher e¢ ciency of banks in acquiring this information. We also assess the quantitative importance of di§erences in ...nancial structures by comparing the observed ratios of per-capita GDP in versions of the calibrated model that allow for the use of one or two instruments of external ...nance.
A related paper to ours is Carlstrom and Fuerst (2001). The main di§erence is that in their model, ...rms are ex-ante identical at the time of stipulating a ...nancial contract.2 Moreover, they have access to one ...nancing instrument only. Therefore, in their framework it is not possible to address the importance of the composition of ...rms'external ...nance for the macroeconomy. Another di§erence arises in the focus of the analysis. Carlstrom and Fuerst address the e§ect of agency costs on the transmission of aggregate shocks. As our focus is
2 In Calstrom and Fuerst (2001), at the time of the contract ...rms can di§er in terms of size. However, due to the speci...c characteristic of the contract solution, this type of heterogeneity is not relevant in equilibrium and ...rms can be assumed identical ex-ante. In what follows, we will use the term 'ex-ante heterogeneity' as implying heterogeneity at the time of the contract in the risk of defaulting at the end of the period. This type of heterogeneity is also relevant in equilibrium.
3

on the determinants of ...nancial market structures, we restrict the attention to a steady state analysis.
Our paper also relates to recent theories of ...nancial intermediation (e.g. Chemmanur and Fulghieri (1994) and Holstrom and Tirole (1997), among several others). We share with Chemmanur and Fulghieri (1994) the idea that banks treat di§erently borrowing ...rms in situations of ...nancial distress because they are long-term players in the debt market while bondholders are not. Therefore, banks have an incentive to acquire a larger amount of information about ...rms. By minimizing the probability of their ine¢ cient liquidation, banks build a reputation for ...nancial exibility and attract ...rms that are likely to face temporary situations of distress. The steady state distribution of ...rms arising in our model closely resembles that obtained by Holstrom and Tirole (1997) in a two-period model where ...rms and intermediaries are capital constrained. The authors ...nd that poorly capitalized ...rms do not invest. Well capitalized ...rms ...nance their investment directly on the market, relying on cheaper, less-information intensive ...nance. Firms with intermediate levels of capitalization can invest, but only with the help of information-intensive external ...nance.
The paper proceeds as follows. In section 2, we describe the environment and outline the sequence of events. In section 3, we present the analysis. We start by showing that in our economy the presence of agency costs translates into a ...rm-speci...c markup that entrepreneurs need to charge over marginal costs. We proceed to derive the optimal contract between ...rms and FIs, and we characterize the endogenous ...nancial structure of the economy. We show that in each period, conditional on the realization of the ...rst idiosyncratic shock, entrepreneurs split into three sets: entrepreneurs that decide to abstain from production, entrepreneurs that approach a bank and possibly obtain a loan, and entrepreneurs that raise external ...nance through CMFs. Finally, we describe the consumption and investment decisions of entrepreneurs and households, present aggregation results and characterize the competitive equilibrium. In section 4, we illustrate the main properties of the model in steady state. In section 5, we review the evidence on di§erences in the intermediation activities and in the ...nancial structure of the corporate sector in the US and the euro area. Then, we present a calibration of the model that replicates in steady state the outlined key di§erences. Finally, we explore possible reasons for such di§erences and we look at the implications for allocations. In section 6, we conclude and outline our future research.
4

2 The Model
We cast the di§erent role of corporate bonds and bank loans into a dynamic general equilibrium model with credit market frictions, where we maintain the assumption of one-period maturity of the debt.
The domestic economy is inhabited by a continuum of identical in...nitely-lived households, a continuum of heterogeneous ...rms owned by in...nitely lived risk-neutral entrepreneurs, and two types of zero-pro...t FIs. Each ...rm, indexed by i 2 [0; 1] ; starts the period with an endowment of physical capital and with a constant returns to scale production technology that uses labor and capital as inputs. As the value of the initial capital stock is not su¢ cient to ...nance the input bill, producing ...rms need to raise external ...nance.
In our model, two key ingredients allow to introduce a non-trivial choice of ...rms among alternative instruments of external ...nance. The ...rst ingredient is the existence of two distinct types of FIs, where banks are willing to spend resources to acquire information about an unobserved productivity factor, while CMFs are not. The second key ingredient is a sequence of three idiosyncratic productivity shocks hitting each ...rm. The ...rst shock, "1;it; is publicly observed and realizes before ...rms take ...nancial and production decisions. The second shock, "2;it; is not observed by anyone (not even the entrepreneur). Information on the realization of this shock can be acquired by the FIs at a cost that is proportional to the value of the ...rm and then disclosed to the ...rm in exchange of an up-front fee. The third shock, "3;it; realizes after borrowing occurs and is observable to the entrepreneur only. It can be monitored by FIs at the end of the period, at a cost that is a fraction of the ...rm's production. The ...rst shock generates observable heterogeneity among ...rms in the risk of default at the end of the period. The second shock, in combination with the information acquisition role of banks, provides the rationale for choosing bank ...nance for ...rms facing high risk of default. The combination of these two shocks is crucial to generate cross-sectional variation in ...rms'...nancing choices. Finally, the third shock introduces asymmetric information and rationalizes the existence of risky debt as the optimal contract between lenders and borrowers.
Loans extended by both types of FIs take the form of intra-period trade credit calculated in units of the output good, as in Carlstrom and Fuerst (2001). Firms obtain labor and capital inputs from the households against the promise to deliver the factor payments at the end of the period. This requires a contractual arrangement, which is supplied by a FI.
5

2.1 The environment

2.1.1 Households

Households maximize the expected value of the discounted stream of future utilities,

X1 E0 t [ln ct + (1 lt)] ; 0 < < 1;
t=0

(1)

where is the households'discount rate, ct is consumption, lt denotes working hours and is

a preference parameter. The households are also the owners of the FIs, to which they lend on

a trade credit account to be settled at the end of each period. The representative household

faces the budget constraints,

ct + kt+1 (1 )kt wtlt + rtkt;

(2)

where wt denotes the real wage and rt the rental rate on capital.

2.1.2 Entrepreneurs

Each entrepreneur i enters the period holding capital zit: The ...rm operates a CRS technology

described by

yit = "1;it"2;it"3;itHitKi1t ;

(3)

where Kit and Hit denote the ...rm-level capital and labor, respectively. The productivity shocks "1;it; "2;it and "3;it are random iid disturbances, which occur at di§erent times during the period. They have mean unity,3 are mutually independent and have aggregate distribution functions denoted by 1; 2 and 3 respectively. Per independence assumption, these are also the marginal distributions. The entrepreneur faces the constraint that the available funds, xit, need to equal the costs of renting the factors of production;

xit = wtHit + rtKit:

(4)

Entrepreneurs are in...nitely lived, risk-neutral and more impatient than households. They discount the future at a rate , where is the discount factor of households and 0 < < 1. Entrepreneurial utility is linear in consumption and in e§ort. Running a risky project requires an entrepreneurial e§ort proportional to the size of the project, xit. De...ne Dit as a dummy
3 An aggregate technology shock can be introduced by assuming that the mean "1t of the ...rst entrepreneurspeci...c technology shock is not unitary.
6

variable that takes the value of 1 if ...rm i produces in period t and of 0 if it does not. The

problem is to maximize the expected value of the discounted stream of future utilities,

X1 E0 (
t=0

)t (eit

xitDit) ; 0 < < 1;

subject to the budget constraint

eit + zit+1 = yiet;

(5) (6)

Here eit denotes entrepreneurial consumption, zit+1 is investment in physical capital to be used in period t + 1; and yiet is the share of the ...rm's production accruing to the entrepreneur after repayment of the loans. The parameter measures the disutility of exerting e§ort in running

the project.

Notice that, because entrepreneurs are more impatient than households, they demand a

higher internal rate of return to investment. This opens the room for trade between households

and entrepreneurs despite the agency costs of external ...nance.

2.1.3 Agency costs and ...nancial intermediation

Entrepreneurs obtain labor and capital inputs from the households against the promise to

deliver the factor payments at the end of the period. Given the possibility of default by ...rms,

this promise needs to be backed up by a contractual arrangement with a FI (a bank or a

CMF). The competitive FIs are able to diversify the risk among the continuum of ...rms facing

idiosyncratic risk. Hence, they ensure repayment of the factors of production to the households

despite the possibility of default by ...rms. Since credit arrangements are settled at the end of

the same period, the intermediaries break exactly even on average.

Let

!it

be

the

uncertain

productivity 8

factor

at

contracting

time,

when

...rms

approach

FIs,

!it

< =:

"2;it"3;it "3;it

for CMF ...nance for bank ...nance

Firms that decide to raise ...nance from banks pay an up-front fee that covers the bank's cost

of information acquisition about the signal "2;it: The fee is a ...xed proportion of the ...rm's

value nit: This cost is not faced by ...rms that sign a contract with CMFs, as these FIs do not

acquire information about the unobserved shock. Hence, the disposable net worth of a ...rm at

the time of the contract is given by n~it; where

8

n~it

< =:

nit (1

)nit

for CMF ...nance for bank ...nance

7

Conditional on "1;it and possibly "2;it as described in section 2.2 below, each entrepreneur chooses to invest an amount 0 nbit n~it of internal ...nance in the risky project and requests an amount xit nbit of external ...nance to a FI to back up his promise of repayment, for total

funds at hand of xit. Throughout the analysis, we assume that entrepreneurs cannot enter

actuarily fair gambles with FIs.

Each FI is willing to ...nance a project whose size is a ...xed proportion of the internal funds

invested,

xit = nbit;

1:

(7)

This assumption captures the idea that entrepreneurs di§er in their ability to run projects. In particular, the maximal size of a project which an entrepreneur is capable of running is proportional to his net worth.
After the realization of the uncertain productivity factor, !it; the entrepreneur observes the actual production in units of goods, yit; and announces to the FI repayment of the debt or default. The realization of !it is only known to the ...rm unless there is costly monitoring, which requires destroying a fraction of the ...rm's output. After the announcement of the entrepreneur, the FI decides whether or not to monitor.
The informational structure at contracting time corresponds to the costly state veri...cation (CSV) framework of Townsend (1979) and Gale and Hellwig (1985).4 A standard result of this framework is that the optimal contract between each ...rm and FI is risky debt. The contract speci...es how to divide the ...rm's ...nancing requirement into internal and external ...nance. It also speci...es, for each announced output and prior information ("1;it under CMF ...nance and "1;it"2;it under bank ...nance), a threshold for the uncertain productivity factor, !it. The ...rm defaults and the FI commits to monitor if the entrepreneur's announcement of !it is below this threshold. If there is monitoring, !it is made known to the FI and the ...rm's production is completely seized. The contract also sets a ...xed repayment for ...rms that do not default.

2.2 The timing of events
The following list provides an overview of the timing of events in period t:
4 Restriction (7) is usually not imposed in the costly state veri...cation literature. It is necessary in our model economy to ensure that all ...rms raise ...nite amounts of external ...nance, despite the presence of ex-ante heterogeneity. Such assumption and its consequences are discussed in greater detail in section 3.2.1.

8

Entrepreneurs and households enter the period holding respectively capital zit and kht. Households plan, how much labor to supply, and how much consumption and investment goods to purchase. They also supply labor and rent out their capital stock. Entrepreneurs calculate the end-of-period value nit of their capital holdings zit, which is publicly observable:
Financial decisions unfold over three stages.
I. The ...rst entrepreneur-speci...c shock "1;it is realized and publicly observed. Conditional on its realization, entrepreneurs decide whether to:
a. Abstain from production. Entrepreneurs facing a low "1;it; or a high risk of default, decide not to borrow and not to produce, i.e. they choose nbit = 0. They rent out capital on the market, thus retaining their initial net worth, nit; until the end of the period. b. Possibly borrow from banks and produce. Entrepreneurs facing an intermediate realization of "1;it decide to approach a bank and to postpone their production decision after the realization of the second productivity shock "2;it:5 c. Borrow from CMFs and produce. Entrepreneurs facing a high realization of "1;it decide to raise external ...nance from CMFs and not to acquire information on "2;it:
II. "2;it is realized and not observed by anyone. Information on its realization is acquired by banks at a cost nit and communicated to entrepreneurs. Conditional on "2;it; entrepreneurs choose their investment level 0 nbit n~it = (1 )nit; i.e. whether to: d. Abstain from production, in which case nbit = 0. These entrepreneurs rent out capital, retaining their remaining net worth, (1 )nit; until the end of the period. e. Borrow from banks and produce.
III. Entrepreneurs that have chosen to produce hire labor Hit and rent capital Kit from the households against the promise to deliver the factor payments at the end of the period.
5 At this point, one could introduce the possibilities for entrepeneurs to enter actuarily fair gambles. It turns out that entrepreneurs would enter these gambles, and transfer their entire net worth to those entrepreneurs which draw the highest values of "2. Equivalently, one could assume that banks are allowed to cross-subsidize projects. They would take resources from low-"2 entrepreneurs and give them to high-"2 entrepreneurs. Here we e§ectively outlaw gambling and cross-subsidization, as common in the literature. An assumption which can rule out the bene...ts of such gambles is su¢ cient risk aversion for the entrepreneurs. This, however, would substantially increase the complexity of the model.
9

This promise is backed up by the value of their own capital holdings plus the value of the additional trade credit obtained from the FI (either a bank or a CMF).
The third shock "3;it is realized and observed by the entrepreneur only. Production takes place, yit = "1;it"2;it"3;itHitKi1t . The entrepreneurs keep part of output, yiet; for own consumption and investment, and sell the rest to households to settle trade credit. Entrepreneurs announce the outcome of production and repay loans or default on loans, if they cannot repay the agreed-upon amount. Conditional on the announcement, the ...nancial intermediaries decide whether or not to monitor.
Entrepreneurs consume eit and accumulate capital zi;t+1. Households use the goods purchased for consumption ct and investment in capital kh;t+1.

3 Analysis
First, we show that the presence of agency costs translates into a ...rm-speci...c markup that entrepreneurs need to charge over marginal costs. Then, we characterize the contract between each ...rm and FI, and we derive the endogenous ...nancial structure. We proceed by characterizing consumption and investment decisions of entrepreneurs and households. Finally, we present aggregation results and characterize the competitive equilibrium.

3.1 Factor prices and the markup

Each entrepreneur's net worth, nit; is given by the market value of his accumulated capital stock, zit; calculated as the to-be-earned factor payments plus the depreciated capital stock,6

nit = (1 + rt) zit;

(8)

Firms that produce need to sign a contract with the FIs to raise external ...nance for total funds at hand xit. Normalizing goods prices, the ...rm's demand for labor and capital is derived by solving the problem

max E "1;it"2;it"3;itHitKi1t

wtHit rtKit

6 One possible interpretation is that entrepreneurs sell their capital stock at the beginning of the period

against trade credit nit: Notice that entrepreneurs' net worth should include also a ...xed income component

(e.g. a constant lump-sum subsidy ): This would ensure that, if the entrepreneur defaults in period t 1, he

can obtain external ...nance and eventually produce. Since introducing a small constant subsidy does not a§ect

the analysis, we abstract from it.

10

subject to the ...nancing constraint (4). Here the expectation E[ ] is taken with respect to the

productivity variables yet unknown at the time of the factor hiring decision. More precisely,

8

< E ["1;it"2;it"3;it] = :

"1;it "1;it"2;it

for CMF ...nanced ...rms for bank ...nanced ...rms

Denote the Lagrange multiplier on the ...nancing constraint as sit 1. Optimality implies that

Kit = (1

) xit rt

Hit =

xit wt

E [yit] = sitxit:

where

8

sit

=

< :

"1;itqt "1;it"2;itqt

for CMF ...nance for bank ...nance

(9)

qt = wt

11 :
rt

(10)

We can interpret qt as an aggregate distortion in production arising from the presence of

agency costs in the economy. Notice that sit acts as a markup, which ...rms need to charge

in order to cover the agency costs of ...nancial intermediation. Moreover, sit is ...rm-speci...c:

depending on what is already known about ...nal ...rm productivity, i.e. depending on "1;it and

(for bank-...nanced ...rms) "2;it, the ...nancing constraint may be more or less severe.7

3.2 Financial structure
In our model, the ...nancial contract is intra-period but the game between ...rms and FIs unfolds over three stages (described in section 2.2). To derive the endogenous ...nancial structure, we solve the model using backward induction.
First, we derive the optimal choice of agents in stage III. Conditional on the available prior information ("1;it under bank ...nance and "1;it"2;it under bank ...nance), ...rms and FIs stipulate a contract that is the optimal solution to a costly state veri...cation (CSV) problem.
Then, we characterize the optimal choice of agents in stage II. Firms that have signed contracts with banks acquire at a cost information about "2;it; on the basis of which they decide whether or not to abstain from production. The decision is taken conditional on the
7 In Carlstrom and Fuerst (2001), as in most of the literature, nothing is known before ...rms produce, i.e., E ["1;it"2;it"3;it] = 1 and sit = qt.
11

solution of the game in stage III (the ...nancial contract) and on the available prior information ("1;it"2;it). We characterize thresholds for the realization of the observed ...rm-speci...c markup sit that determine the ...rm's decision of whether or not to borrow and to produce.
Finally, we characterize the optimal decision in stage I. Conditional on the solution of stage II and III (which provides expected pay-o§ from producing when raising external ...nance through banks or CMFs), ...rms decide whether or not to produce and, if they do, which instrument of external ...nance to use. We derive thresholds for the realization of the observed ...rm-speci...c markup sit that determine the ...rm's decision. We show that these thresholds depend only on the distributional assumptions on the three idiosyncratic productivity shocks.

3.2.1 The costly state veri...cation contract

The solution to our CSV problem is a standard debt contract (see e.g. Gale and Hellwig (1985))

that is characterized by three properties. First, the repayment to the FI is constant in states

when monitoring does not occur. Second, the ...rm is declared bankrupt if and only if the ...xed

repayment cannot be honoured. Third, in case of bankruptcy, the FI commits to monitor and

completely seizes the output in the hands of the ...rm. The ...rst and third properties ensure

that the contract is incentive compatible. The second property ensures that monitoring is done

in as few circumstances as possible to avoid the deadweight loss.

Let ! and '! be respectively the distribution and density function of !it and recall that

the presence of agency costs implies that yit = sit!itxit: De...ne

Z1

f !j =

! !j ! (d!)

!j

Z !j

g(!j) =

! ! (d!)

0

! !j + !j 1

! !j

(11) (12)

as the expected shares of ...nal output accruing respectively to an entrepreneur and to a lender,

after stipulating a contract that sets the ...xed repayment at sit!ijtxit units of output; for

j = b; c. The index j denotes the type of FI, where b indicates banks and c indicates CMFs.

The optimal contract solves the following CSV problem:

h max sitf (!jit)

i xit

(13)

12

subject to constraint (7) and

sitg(!jit)xit f !ijt + g !jit
nbit

xit nbit

1 h

! !jit

0; sitf (!jit)

i xit nbit

(14) (15) (16)

The optimal contract maximizes the entrepreneur's expected utility subject to the restriction on the project size, (7), the lender being willing to lend out funds, (14), the feasibility condition, (15), and the entrepreneur being willing to sign the contract, (16). Since loans are intra-period, the opportunity cost of lending for the intermediary equals the amount of loans itself, xit nbit:
Notice that constraint (7) usually does not appear in the standard CSV setup. When ...rms are identical in terms of default risk, the contract determines optimally the size of the project. This latter turns out to be linear in net worth, as in our model. However, when ...rms are identical the ratio of the project size to net worth depends on the threshold for the idiosyncratic shock and on the aggregate variable qt, while it is constant in our model. This implies that leverage is ...xed in our environment. The reason for this assumption is that, with heterogeneity in the risk of default, ...rms di§er in terms of credit-worthiness. When the distribution of the idiosyncratic shock "1t is unbounded, the optimal project size for ...rms experiencing extremely large values of that shock would be unbounded. To avoid corner solutions in the allocation of funds from FIs, we set the project size to a ...xed share of the ...rm's initial net worth. This assumption ensures that all ...rms raise ...nite amounts of external ...nance.

Proposition 1 Under the optimal contract, the entrepreneur either invests nothing, nbit = 0; or invest his entire net worth, nbit = n~it; requiring an amount ( 1) n~it of external ...nance. The optimal contract is characterized by a threshold !ijt; j = b; c, such that, if the entrepreneur announces a realization of the uncertain productivity factor ! !j; no monitoring occurs. If ! < !j, the FI monitors at a cost and completely seizes the resources in the hands of the
entrepreneur. The threshold is given by the solution to

sitg(!ijt) =

1:

(17)

Proof: Condition (7) and (16) imply that the expected utility of entrepreneurs willing to produce is not lower than the utility from disposing of the net worth initially invested. Notice that the problem is linear in nbit: Thus, the solution is such that the entrepreneur either invest
13

nothing and does not produce, nbit = 0; or invest everything and produce, nbit = n~it: Entre-

preneurs that produce only raise costly external ...nance to cover what is needed in excess of

the internal funds, xit n~it = (

by

observing

that

f

(0)

=

R1
0

!

1) n~it:

Expression

(17)

for

the

threshold h

!jit

can be i

derived

! (d!) = 1; g (0) = 0, f 0(!jit) = 1 ! !ijt < 0; and

g0(!ijt)

>

0:

This

latter

property

can

be

shown

by

contradictiohn.

Suppose

g0 i

!ijt

< 0: Then,

it would be possible to increase expected utility of the ...rm, sitf (!ijt)

n~it; by reducing

!ijt while increasing expected pro...ts of the FI, sitg(!ijt) n~it: Hence, !ijt could not be a solution

to the contract. It follows that the unique interior solution to the problem is given by (17).

The terms of the contract can be written as

!jit = !j(sit); j = b; c

(18)

where sit satis...es (9).

Notice

that

@!ijt @sit

=

g (! ijt ) sit g 0 (! ijt )

< 0 and hence

@!ijt @qt

< 0: The higher

the ...rm-speci...c mark-up sit or qt; the lower the threshold, !jit; below which the entrepreneur

defaults and is monitored. Given the solution to the contract, we can de...ne the risk premium

rijt as the interest rate charged for the use of external ...nance. It is implicitly given by the condition (1 + rijt) (xit n~it) = sit!ijtxit.

3.2.2 Bank loan continuation
At the beginning of stage II, the second productivity shock, "2;it; is realized and not observed by anyone. Information on this shock is acquired by banks and communicated to the entrepreneur. Conditional on the realization of "2;it; the entrepreneur chooses whether to abstain from production or to obtain trade credit and produce.

Proposition 2 A threshold for sit = "1;it"2;itqt; below which the entrepreneur does not proceed

with the bank loan, exists and is unique. It is given by a constant sd that satis...es

h sitf (!b(sit))

i = 1:

(19)

Proof: Consider the situation of a ...rm that, upon payment of the information acquisition

fee, nit; observes "1;it and "2;it. The entrepreneur proceeds with the bank loan if and only

if his expected utility exceeds the opportunity costs of renting his capital to others, i.e. if

sitf (!b(sit))

1; where sit = "1;it"2;itqt: Notice that expected utility from proceeding

with the bank is negative for sit = 0 and strictly increasing in sit; since f 0

!bit

<

0

and

@!bit @sit

<

14

0: Hence, a solution to condition (19), taken with equality, exists and is unique. Moreover, it is constant across ...rms and time.
Consider for a moment an environment where banks are allowed to cross-subsidize ...rms. Each ...rm would decide at the beginning of stage II whether or not to exchange its net worth for an actuarily fair gamble. The gamble would set an up-front fee and a repayment to the bank, which would depend on the prior available information, "1;it, and the unobserved shock, "2;it. In appendix A, we show that the optimal ...nancial arrangement would be one where banks cross-subsidize ...rms. With "2;it below a certain threshold, the ...rm would not produce but the bank would seize completely its net worth. With "2;it above that threshold, the ...rm would get full funding at the lowest possible cost. Repayments of producing ...rms would be minimized and so would be the probability of default and expected monitoring costs. The contract with cross-state subsidization would be optimal because it would minimize agency costs, increasing the aggregate resources available for entrepreneurial consumption and hence improving welfare of the risk-neutral entrepreneurs. It might be of interest to investigate the resulting general equilibrium e§ects in such an environment. However, a frequent objection to contracts that allow for cross-state subsidization is that lotteries are not observed in ...nancial markets. One possible explanation is that investors are risk-averse, an element that is neglected in standard models with agency costs. For this reason, we do not allow ...rms to gamble:

3.2.3 The choice of the ...nancing instrument

In stage I, after "1;it realizes, the entrepreneur chooses whether or not to produce and, if he

does, how to ...nance production. For notational simplicity, we drop the subscripts.

The expected utility of an entrepreneur, who proceeds with bank ...nance conditional on

the realization of "1; is F b(s)n, where s = "1q and

F b(s) = (1

Z
) sd s"2f (!b(s"2))
s

2(d"2)

h 1

2(

sd s

i )

+

!

2

(

sd s

)

(20)

The possibility for the entrepreneur to await the further news "2 before deciding whether or

not to proceed with the bank loan provides option value.

The expected utility of an entrepreneur, who proceeds with CMF ...nance conditional on

the realization of "1; is F c(s)n, where s = "1q and

F c(s) = [sf (!c(s)) ] :

(21)

15

Finally, the expected utility of an entrepreneur, who abstains from production, is simply n. Note in particular, that all payo§ functions are linear in net worth n.
Knowing its own mark-up s = "1q, each entrepreneur chooses his or her best option, leading to the overall payo§ F (s)n, where

F (s) = maxf1; F b(s); F c(s)g:

(22)

Conditional on s, entrepreneurs split into three sets: at, the set of entrepreneurs that

abstain from raising external ...nance in period t; bt; the set of entrepreneurs that sign a

contract with banks, and ct; the set of CMF-...nanced entrepreneurs. We show that these

three sets are intervals in terms of the ...rst idiosyncratic productivity shock "1.

In the analysis below, we assume that conditions (A1) and (A2) are satis...ed.

(A1) F b0(s) 0;

(A2) F b0(s) < F c0(s); for all s = "1q:

Assumptions (A1) and (A2) impose mild restrictions on the parameters of the model. A

su¢

cient

condition

for

(A1)

to

be

satis...ed

is

that

'"2

(

sd s

)

<

1;

since

sdf (!b(sd))

= 1+

and

f

0(!b)

@!b @("2s)

>

0:

The

condition

imposed

by

(A2)

is

also

mild.

Intuitively,

...rms

with

a

low

realization of the productivity shock "1 (a low s) have expectations of low returns from under-

taking production after signing a contract with the bank, as represented by the ...rst two terms

in brackets, in the expression for F b(s): For those ...rms, the gain from minimizing the possi-

bility of liquidation, (1

)

2

(

sd s

);

is

relatively

more

important.

If

s

increases,

the

expected

return from production increases both for bank- and for CMF-...nanced ...rms. However, the

increase is higher under CMF ...nance because intermediation costs are lower. Hence, there will

be a threshold above which expected pro...ts from production for CMF-...nanced ...rms exceed

those for bank-...nanced ...rms. (A1) and (A2) ensure uniqueness of the thresholds sb and sc:

Proposition 3 Under (A1), a threshold for s = "1q, below which the entrepreneur decides not to raise external ...nance, exists and is unique. It is given by a constant sb that satis...es

F b(s) = 1:

(23)

Proof: Notice that F b(0) = 1 : Under (A1), there is a unique cuto§ point sb; which satis...es the condition F b(s) = 1: This point is constant across ...rms and time.

16

Proposition 4 Under (A1) and (A2), a threshold for s = "1q above which entrepreneurs sign a contract with the CMF, exists and is unique. It is given by a constant sc that satis...es

F b(s) = F c(s):

(24)

Proof: Notice that, F b(0) = 1 > F c(0): A su¢ cient condition for existence and uniqueness of a threshold sc is provided by (A1) and (A2). The threshold is constant across ...rms and time.
Conditional on qt; entrepreneurs split into three sets that are intervals in terms of the ...rst idiosyncratic productivity shock "1;it,

at = f"1;it j "1;it < sb=qtg bt = f"1;it j sb=qt "1;it sc=qtg ct = f"1;it j "1;it > sc=qtg

for some constants sb, sc. Notice that an increase in qt raises expected pro...ts from producing,

conditional on the realization of "1;it, and reduces the thresholds sb=qt and sc=qt: Hence, it

decreases the share of ...rms that decide to abstain from production and increases the share of

...rms that sign a contract with FIs. Notice also that condition (19) determines a threshold sd

for the ...rm-speci...c markup, below which ...rms that have signed a contract with banks decide

to abstain. A corresponding threshold for the second ...rm-speci...c shock "2;it can be computed

as sd=(qt"1;it): Conditional on the realization of "1;it; an increase in qt reduces this threshold

and the share of ...rms that decide to abstain conditional on having signed a contract with a

bank. The ...rm's decision on whether or not to produce can be characterized by

8

Dit

< =:

1

if

"1;it

>

sc=qt

or

if

sb=qt

"1;it 0 else

sc=qt and "2;it > sd="1;itqt

3.3 Consumption and investment decisions
Consumption and investment decisions of the households are described by the solution to the maximization problem (1) subject to (2), which is given by

ct = wt

11

= ct

Et

(1 ct+1

+ rt+1) :

(25) (26)

17

The entrepreneurial decision on consumption and on investment in capital, which will be
used as net worth in the following period, derives from the maximization of (5) subject to (6), where yiet = n~it if ...rm i abstains, yiet = sit !it !ijt n~it if ...rm i borrows and repays, and yiet = 0 if ...rm i borrows and default. The optimality condition is then given by the intertemporal Euler equation

1 = Et f(1 + rt+1)F ("1;it+1qt+1)g :

(27)

Observe that qt+1 depends on wt+1 and rt+1 through (10). This equation ties down a relationship between these two factor prices. It also pins down the evolution of net worth of the entrepreneurs, since they will elastically save and supply capital, so that factor prices satisfy this equation exactly period by period.

3.4 Aggregation

We are now ready to calculate aggregate variables. Given qt and total entrepreneurial net worth nt, we can compute total demand for funds, xt; total output including agency costs, yt; and total output lost to agency costs, yta; by integrating across ...rms. The conditions are:

xt = yt = yta =

x (qt; sb; sc; sd) nt y (qt; sb; sc; sd) qt nt a (qt; sb; sc; sd) qt nt;

(28) (29) (30)

where the functions x ( ) ; y ( ) and a ( ) are de...ned in Appendix C. Aggregate entrepreneurial consumption and investment have to satisfy the constraint

et + zt+1 = # (qt; sb; sc; sd) nt;

(31)

where the function # ( ) is also de...ned in Appendix C. Finally, aggregate factor demands are given by

wtHt = xt rtKt = (1 ) xt:

(32) (33)

18

3.5 Market clearing

Market clearing for capital, labor and output requires that

Kt = kt + zt;

Ht = lt; yt = ct + et + yta + Kt+1

(1

)Kt:

(34) (35) (36)

Market clearing for loans is ensured by condition (4), which equates the total funds available (i.e. the sum of internal and external ...nance) to the demand of funds.

3.6 Competitive equilibrium

Given the process of the idiosyncratic shocks, f"1;it; "2;it; "3;itg ; and the initial conditions

(k0; z0) ; a competitive equilibrium consists of sequences of ...rm-speci...c mark-ups, fsitg1t=0 ;

threshold levels for the uncertain productivity factor

!b(sit); !c(sit)

1 t=0

;

constant

thresholds

for the ...rm's mark-up fsb; sc; sdgt1=0 ; production decisions fDitg1t=0 ; demand functions for la-

bor and capital fHit; Kitgt1=0 ; and consumption and investment decisions feit; zi;t+1g1t=0 ; for i 2 (0; 1) : It also consists of aggregate factors fqtg1t=0 ; allocations fct; lt; Ht; Kt; et; xt; yt; yte; ytagt1=0 ;

laws of motion for the capital stocks fkt+1; zt+1gt1=0 ; and prices fwt; rtg such that:

Households maximize expected utility by choosing ct; ht and kt+1; subject to the budget constraint, taking prices as given.

Entrepreneurs decide whether or not to produce: If they do, they choose Hit and Kit; to maximize pro...ts, subject to the production technology and the ...nancing constraint, taking prices as given. Firm i; i 2 ct takes as given also the realization of the ...rst idiosyncratic productivity shock, "1;it. Firm i; i 2 bt takes as given the realization of "1;it and "2;it. Entrepreneurs also choose consumption, ei;t; and investment, zi;t+1; to maximize their linear utility, subject to their budget constraint.

FIs and ...rms solve a CSV problem. The solution determines the amount of external ...nance to be used and a threshold level for the uncertain productivity factor !jit; j = b; c: When this factor is lower than the threshold, the ...rm is monitored.

The market clearing conditions for goods, labor, capital and loans hold.

A competitive equilibrium is characterized by equations (8)-(12), (17) and (19)-(36). 19

4 Steady state properties: a numerical analysis

We parameterize the model at the stochastic steady state, which is characterized in Appendix

B. The Appendix also describes the numerical procedure used to compute it. We assume that

the iid productivity shocks v = "1; "2; "3 are lognormally distributed, i.e. log(v) is normally

distributed with variance

2 v

and

mean

2 v

=2.

We

set

the

discount

factor

at

= :98 and the

depreciation rate at = :025;8 leading to a real interest rate r = 4%. We choose = :64

in the production function and a coe¢ cient in preferences so that labor equal :3 in steady

state, = 2:6: We set monitoring costs to be 15% of the ...rm's output, = :15; a value

in the middle of the estimates in the empirical literature.9 We are then left with 7 free

parameters, ; ; ; ; "1; "2 and "3. In this section we ...x them arbitrarily to show the qualitative properties of the model in steady state, i.e. = 1:6; = 0; = :11; = :704;

"1 = :26; "2 = :46 and "3 = :13. In section 5 below, we calibrate the model and choose the parameters to match stylized facts on the ...nancial structure of the corporate sector in the US

and in the euro area (here onwards EA).

In Figure 1, we show expected pro...ts for entrepreneurs. Panel (a) plots respectively ex-

pected pro...ts from abstaining, from signing a contract with a bank and from signing a contract

with a CMF, as a function of the ...rm's mark-up, s = "1q. The intersection points of the three

curves provide the cuto§ points, sb and sc. The panel also shows the mean of the ...rm-speci...c

mark-up s; plus/minus two standard deviations. After the realization of "1; 95% of the ...rms'

markups lie within this region. Panel (b) shows how expected pro...ts from bank ...nance move

with the information acquisition fee : When = 0; expected pro...ts from bank ...nance always

exceed those from abstaining or from CMF ...nance. All ...rms raise external ...nance through

banks. When is large, the option value of acquiring more information is not large enough to

o§set the cost. All ...rms either abstain or use CMF ...nance. Only for intermediate values of

; ...rms that decide to produce di§erentiate in terms of their ...nancing choice. They split into

bank ...nance and CMF ...nance according to the realization of their markup s.

8 The annual depreciation rate is set to equal the US ratio of investment to capital over the period 1964-2001, as reported by Christiano et al (2004).
9 Warner (1977) estimates small direct costs in a study of 11 railroad bankruptcies, with a maximum of 5.3% of the ...rm's value. Altman (1984) ...nds that direct costs plus indirect costs (those related to the loss of customers, suppliers and employees, and the managerial expenses) are between 12.1% and 16.7%. Alderson and Betker (1995) provide the largest estimate, 36% of the ...rm's value.

20

Figure 2 illustrates the ...nancial decisions of ...rms. Panel (a) plots how ...rms allocate among ...nancial instruments. Conditional on the value of the aggregate variable q; ...rms experiencing a productivity shock "1 sb=q decide to abstain from production. Firms with sb=q "1 sc=q sign a contract with banks: Firms with "1 sc=q sign a contract with CMFs. Among ...rms that sign a contract with banks, those experiencing a productivity shock "2 sd="1q decide not to proceed to the production stage. Panel (b) plots the threshold sd="1q; over the range of mark-ups (sb=q; sc=q), as a function of "1: Panel (c) shows the probability that "2 sd="1q; as a function of "1: The larger "1; the lower the threshold level for "2 and the higher the probability that the ...rm will produce, conditional on having signed a contract with a bank.
Figure 3 plots the steady state distribution of ...rms among production activities. Firms that do not produce are those that decide not to raise external ...nance because "1 sb=q, and those that sign a contract with the bank but, after the realization of "2, decide to drop out of production. For these ...rms, sb=q "1 sc=q and "2 sd=q"1:
Figures 4 and 5 plot the results from a sensitivity analysis, which is carried out by modifying one parameter at a time. The ...rst experiment is to look at the e§ect of di§erent entrepreneurial discount factors by changing the value of q. Notice from the steady state version of equation (27) that, for a given level of entrepreneurial e§ort ; increasing q is equivalent to increasing the value of : This raises the share of ...rms that sign a contract with intermediaries and reduces the share of ...rms that abstain. It also reduces the share of ...rms that sign a contract with banks relative to CMFs. Intuitively, a higher q increases the ...rm's expected pro...ts from raising external ...nance through banks as well as CMFs. However, the higher is q; the lower is the option value of waiting that banks provide. Figure 4 illustrates these mechanisms by plotting the shares in steady state as a function of q. Panel (a)-(c) reports respectively the share of ...rms that abstain from production, sign a contract with the bank and sign a contract with the CMF. Panel (d) plots the overall fraction of ...rms that default and are monitored at the end of the period. For a given "1; the increase in pro...ts reduces the risk of the ...rm to default. However, it also induces ...rms with high risk to undertake productive activities. The overall e§ect is to increase the realized share of default in the economy for low levels of q and to decrease it afterwards. Finally, panels (e)-(f) plot respectively the share of ...rms that, after having signed a contract with a bank, abstain or default.
The second experiment, reported in Figure 5, is to change the value of some key parameters, such as , "1 and "2: In panel (a), we increase the costs of information acquisition, ; from
21

the .11 to .16, and show with thick lines the new threshold levels, sb=q and sc=q. The share of ...rms that sign a contract with banks decreases and a larger fraction of ...rms decides to abstain. Panel (b) reports the results from increasing "1 from .26 to .46. Firms experience with higher probability low realizations of the productivity shock "1 before taking their ...nancing decisions. Therefore a larger share of ...rms decides to abstain. Finally, panel (c) plots the distribution of ...rms and new thresholds as thick lines, when "2 is increased from .46 to .56. With a larger variance of the signal "2; ...rms give a higher value to the possibility to acquire more information through banks. The share of ...rms that raise bank ...nance increases.
5 Comparing the US and the euro area
In this section, we review the evidence on the ...nancial structure of the corporate sector in the US and the EA. We calibrate the model to capture in steady state some key di§erences and we provide model-based answers to the questions: What are the causes of di§erences in the ...nancial structure? What are the implications for allocations?
Some ingredients of our model, such as the degree of heterogeneity of ...rms in the risk of default or the amount of uncertainty that banks are able to acquire about ...rms'productivity, cannot be confronted directly with the data because of limited empirical evidence. The calibration procedure described below o§ers an indirect estimation of those unobserved characteristics of the ...nancial markets based on a structural model.
5.1 Evidence on intermediation and ...nancial structures
We document some corporate ...nance di§erences between the US and the EA, which we summarize in table 1. Some distinguishing features emerge: the ratio of bank ...nance to bond ...nance and the debt to equity ratio are lower in the US than in the EA, while the converse is true for the risk premia on bank loans.
Bank ...nance to bond ...nance ratio. We compute the ratio of bank ...nance to bond ...nance in the US and in the EA over the period 1997-2003. In the US, the ratio is 0.74. In the EA, it is 7.3, approximately ten times higher.10
10 For the US, data are from the Flow of Funds Accounts. Bank ...nance is given by bank loans plus other loans and advances, i.e. the sum of lines 22 and 23 in Table L 101. Securities are the sum of commercial paper, municipal securities and corporate bonds, lines 19, 20 and 21 in Table L 101. For the euro area, data are from the Euro Area Flow of Funds. Loans are those taken from euro area MFIs and other ...nancial corporations
22

Debt to equity ratio. The debt to equity ratio for the US non-farm, non-...nancial corporate business sector is 0.41 over the period 1997-2003. For the EA, the same ratio for non-...nancial corporations is 0.61 over the period 1997-2002.11
Risk premium on bank loans. In the US, the di§erence between the prime rate on bank loans to business and the commercial paper rate is 298 bps over the period 1997-2003. In the EA, over the same period, the di§erence between the interest rate on loans up to 1 year of maturity to non-...nancial corporations and the three-month interest rate, is 267 bps.12 These numbers should be seen as upper estimates of the existing risk premia. English and Nelson (1998) report selected results from the August 1998 Survey of Terms of Business Lending in the US. The di§erence between the average loan rate to domestic ...rms (weighted by loan volumes) and the commercial paper rate emerging from the survey is 188 bps, while for the same year the di§erence between the prime rate and the commercial paper rate is 301 bps. The existence of higher spreads in the US relative to Europe is con...rmed by existing studies. Carey and Nini (2004) ...nd that the di§erence between rates on bank syndicated loans and LIBOR in the US exceeds the corresponding di§erence in the EMU by 29.8 bps. This ...nding is supported by calculations of net interest margins in the banking industry by country. Cecchetti (1999) reports interest rate margins for the US in 1996 to be 268 bps. In the same year, the average interest rate margin for Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Portugal and Spain is 204.
Risk premium on corporate bonds. In the US, the di§erence between the average yield to maturity on selected long term corporate bonds (rated Aaa and Baa) minus the 3months Treasury Bill is 339 bps for the period 1997-2003.13 English and Nelson (1998) report similar spreads between bank loans rated 1 (best) and 5 (worst) in the 1998 Survey of Terms
by non-...nancial corporations. Securities are de...ned as securities other than shares issued by non-...nancial corporations.
11 For the US, data are from the Flow of Funds Accounts. Debt is de...ned as credit market instruments (sum of commercial paper, municipal securities, corporate bonds, bank loans, other loans and advances, mortgages) over the market value of equities outstanding (including corporate farm equities), Table B.102. Masulis (1988) reports a ratio of debt to equity for US corporations in the range 0.5-0.75 for the period 1937-1984. The ratio exhibited a downward trend over the last decades due to ...nancial innovations. For the euro area, data are from the Euro area Flow of Funds. Debt includes loans, debt securities issued and pension fund reserves of non-...nancial corporations. Equity includes quoted and non-quoted equity.
12 Source: for the US, Federal Resrve Board, Table H15; for the euro area, European Central Bank, MU12 average based on country reporting to BIS.
13 Source: Federal Reserve Board, Table H15.
23

of Business Lending, and between yields on AA rated bonds and 'junk'bonds covered in the same survey. The spreads reported are around 200 bps. Mahajan and Fraser (1986) ...nd no evidence of di§erences among bond spreads in the US and the EA. Using more recent data, Carey and Nini (2004) examine spreads estimated using daily Merrill Lynch bond index yields and swap data for the period 1999-2003 for A- and BBB-rated ...rms. They ...nd only small mean and median di§erences between US and EA, after accounting for duration and currency e§ects.14
Default rates. Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997) report average annual default rates from the Dun and Bradstreet data set of 3.9%. Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999) compute the average annual ...rms failures in the post World War II period at 3%. Default rates for high risk corporate bonds are not too di§erent from the average ...gures. Helwege and Kleiman (1996) ...nd an average annual default rate for all high yield bond issuers of 4.5% over the period 1981-1995. Ammer and Packer (2000) compare default rates of US and foreign non-...nancial corporations. They examine bonds of 492 issuers present in Moody's database over the period 1983-1988 and ...nd that the average annual default rate by type of issuer is higher for US non-...nancial corporations than for foreign ...rms. However, after controlling for the rating composition of each sectorial pool, default rates for US and foreign ...rms are similar.

Table 1: Summary of ...nancial facts

Variable

US data EA data

Bank to bond ...nance 0.74

7.3

Debt to equity

0.41

0.61

Risk premium bonds 0.019-0.034 as in US

Risk premium loans 0.019-0.030 0.016-0.027

Average default rate 0.030-0.045 as in US

14 Our model assumes no ...xed cost of issuance of corporate bonds. Santos and Tsatsaronis (2003) use the IFR Platinum database compiled by Thomson Financial Studies, which covers 3,110 bonds issued by the private sector between 1994 and 2001. They ...nd that average gross issuance fees over the period considered are small: 0.82% of the amount raised for bonds issued in US dollars and 0.89% for bonds issued in euros. Given the size of these fees and the similarity among US and euro area, we abstract from them in our analysis.

24

5.2 Calibration
We set ; ; and at the values described in section 5.1 and such that l = :3 in steady state both for the US model and the EA model: We are then left with seven free parameters, ; ; ; ; "1; "2 and "3: The calibration procedure selects the value of to minimize the squared log-deviation of the entrepreneur's from the household's discount factor and the remaining parameters to minimize the squared log-deviation of the model steady state values from the empirical counterparts for the ratio of bank ...nance to bond ...nance, the debt to equity ratio, the average default rate, the risk premium on bonds, the risk premium on loans and the investment to GDP ratio.15
Notice that the data show marked corporate ...nance di§erences between the US and the EA but rather homogeneous investment to GDP ratios.16 In the model, the existence of entrepreneurial e§ort allows to disentangle the entrepreneurs' ...nancing decisions from their investment decisions. The calibration procedure aims at matching corporate ...nance di§erences without introducing counterfactual discrepancies in the investment to GDP ratio or implausible degrees of entrepreneurial patience. The selected parameter values are reported in table 2.

Table 2: Parameter values Parameters US model EA model

0.059

0.134

0.421

0.069

0.928

0.757

1.410

1.610

"1

0.054

0.012

"2

0.131

0.429

"3

0.645

0.576

Table 3 evaluates the performance of the calibrated model in terms of the ...nancial facts outlined above. The model is able to capture large part of the di§erence in the ratio of bank
15 See Appendix B for further details on the calibration procedure. 16 Over the period 1999-2004, the ratio of gross ...xed capital formation to GDP has been similar in the two blocks, being .192 in the US and .206 in the euro area. Source: European Central Bank.
25

...nance to bond ...nance of the US and the EA, while matching the di§erence in the debt to equity ratio. The model also delivers reasonable risk premia and default rates, although in the EA the risk premium on bonds is slightly below the level observed in the data.

Variable

Table 3: Financial facts US model US data EA model EA data

Bank to bond ...nance 0.856

0.740

4.163

7.300

Debt to equity

0.410

0.410

0.610

0.610

Risk premium on bonds 0.028

0.019-0.034 0.013

0.019-0.034

Risk premium on loans 0.022

0.019-0.030 0.022

0.016-0.027

Average default rate

0.041

0.030-0.045 0.047

0.030-0.045

Other predictions of the model in steady state are documented in table 4. Some distinguishing features emerge in the US and EA models under our preferred calibration. First, in the EA model all ...rms approach a ...nancial intermediary. Given the limited amount of observable heterogeneity ( "1), ...rms prefer to approach a bank and to acquire further information before deciding whether or not to produce. In the US model, where the degree of ex-ante heterogeneity is larger, 10 percent of the ...rms decide to abstain from production and not to approach a ...nancial intermediary. On the contrary, the share of ...rms that drop-out from production conditional on having approached a bank (reported in the ...fth row) is similar in the two blocks, reecting the standard deviation of the relevant uncertain productivity factor ( "3). In terms of allocations, the two models delivers similar investment to GDP ratios in the US and in the EA.17 Higher agency costs in the EA relative to the US leave a relatively lower amount of resources available for private consumption. Finally, the value of the aggregate mark-up, q; is larger in the model of the US than in the model of the EA.

17 The investment to GDP ratios predicted by the model should not be compared directly to those observed in the data, given the absence of a public sector.
26

Table 4: Model predictions

Variable

US EA

Share abstain

0.104 0.000

Share bank

0.579 0.885

Share CMF

0.317 0.115

Drop-out if banking 0.509 0.437

q 1.471 1.297

c+e y

0.826 0.761

I y

0.127 0.124

ya y

0.047 0.116

To provide a better understanding of the calibrated models, we carry out a sensitivity analysis. We change one parameter at a time in the EA model, ...x it to the same value of the US model and compare the model predictions to those arising under our benchmark calibration. The results are shown in table 5. The second and third column report the predictions of the benchmark US and EA models to facilitate the comparison. The fourth column reports the results when = :421; as in the US model, and all other parameters are unchanged. The larger entrepreneurial e§ort reduces expected utility from entrepreneurial activity and increases the option value of banking. Given the low degree of ex-ante heterogeneity in the EA, entrepreneurs choose to approach a bank because this allows them to acquire further information before deciding whether to incur the large disutility arising from production. The ...fth column shows the results when is ...xed at :059: For given uncertainty about the shock "2; such a low increases expected payo§ from bank ...nance to the point where all ...rms choose to approach banks. The sixth column lists the results when "1 is ...xed at .054. The higher degree of ex-ante heterogeneity among ...rms reduces the value of exibility provided by banks. A larger share of ...rms chooses CMF ...nance. Finally, the last column reports the case when "3 = :645: This higher value has two e§ects. On the one hand, it reduces the relative gain from information acquisition about "2; thus lowering the share of ...rms choosing to approach banks. Second, it increases the overall uncertainty in the economy. Risk premia and the average default rate increase sizably.

27

Variable

Table 5: Sensitivity analysis

US EA

EA =.421

EA =.059

Bank to bond ...nance 0.856 4.163 ! 1

!1

Debt to equity

0.410 0.610 0.610

0.610

Risk premium on bonds 0.028 0.013 0.000

0.000

Risk premium on loans 0.022 0.022 0.013

0.025

Average default rate

0.041 0.047 0.006

0.026

Share abstain

0.104 0.000 0.000

0.000

Share bank

0.579 0.885 1.000

1.000

Share CMF

0.317 0.115 0.000

0.000

Drop-out if banking

0.509 0.437 0.669

0.430

q

1.471 1.297 1.292

1.292

c+e y

0.826 0.761 0.727

0.809

I y

0.127 0.124 0.107

0.121

ya y

0.047 0.116 0.165

0.069

EA "1 =.054 0.780 0.610 0.042 0.015 0.029 0.000 0.621 0.379 0.460 1.292 0.789 0.135 0.076

EA "3 =.645 0.645 0.610 0.054 0.023 0.149 0.000 0.516 0.484 0.442 1.292 0.787 0.138 0.075

We also carry out a model comparison by ...xing some parameters in the EA model at the values set in the benchmark US model, and by searching for values of the remaining parameters that provide the best ...t according to the seven criteria described above. Table 6 shows the new parameters in the last three columns and compare them to the preferred ones, which are reported for convenience in the second and third columns. The table lists in bold the parameters ...xed at the level set in the US model and in normal font the newly optimized coe¢ cients. The fourth column shows the case where the standard deviation of the shock that is public knowledge, "1; is ...xed. The ...fth column shows the case when both "1 and the information acquisition cost per unit of net worth, ; are ...xed at the US values. Finally, the last column reports the values when "1; "2 and are ...xed. Notice that this case corresponds to constraining the degree of ex-ante heterogeneity and the relative e¢ ciency of banks in the EA to the US values. In fact, "2 can be seen as a measure of overall e¢ ciency of banks in providing information to the market. For a given information acquisition fee ; banks are more e¢ cient if they are able to disclose information about a more volatile shock, i.e. if "2 is higher.

28

Table 6: Parametric restrictions Parameters US EA EA I EA II EA III
0.059 0.134 0.106 0.059 0.059 0.421 0.069 0.038 0.027 0.184 0.928 0.757 0.779 0.751 0.963 1.410 1.610 1.610 1.610 1.610 "1 0.054 0.012 0.054 0.054 0.054 "2 0.131 0.429 0.382 0.296 0.131 "3 0.645 0.576 0.592 0.600 0.693 "2 2.220 3.201 3.603 5.017 2.220
Model predictions under each parameterization are reported in table 7. Columns four to six mark in bold those facts where the ...t is worse than for the benchmark EA model. Model EA I delivers predictions similar to those obtained under the benchmark EA model. Interestingly, the value of the standard deviation of the ...rst shock, "1; has no major implications for the ...t of the model. On the contrary, the calibration procedure for EA II introduces a discrepancy between the investment to GDP ratio of the EA and of the US. Model EA II also overestimates the risk premium on loans and the average default rate, while it underestimates to a larger degree the risk premium on bonds. Under model EA III, the ...t of the model deteriorates further. The predicted risk premium on loans is higher and the premium on bonds is lower than in the benchmark model. More crucially, the model matches to a lower extent the observed di§erence in the ratio of bank ...nance to bond ...nance.
5.2.1 Explaining di§erences in ...nancial structures
Under our benchmark calibration, substantial di§erences arise in the parameter values of the US and EA models. The values reported in table 2 can help explain existing di§erences in the ...nancial structure of the two blocks.
First, the calibrated models suggest that the overall uncertainty about the unobserved productivity shocks ( "2+ "3) is lower in the US (.78) than in the EA (1.0). Moreover, the
29

Variable

Table 7: Model predictions US EA EA I EA II EA III

Bank to bond ...nance 0.860 4.100 4.105 4.021 2.946

Debt to equity

0.410 0.610 0.610 0.610 0.610

Risk premium bonds 0.028 0.013 0.013 0.012 0.011

Risk premium loans 0.022 0.022 0.024 0.028 0.028

Average default rate 0.041 0.047 0.048 0.060 0.044

Share abstain

0.104 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.303

Share bank

0.579 0.885 0.893 0.870 0.606

Share CMF

0.317 0.115 0.107 0.130 0.091

Drop-out if banking 0.509 0.437 0.452 0.369 0.546

q 0.047 1.297 1.219 1.240 1.196

c+e y

0.826 0.761 0.768 0.804 0.779

I y

0.826 0.124 0.133 0.140 0.150

ya y

0.127 0.116 0.099 0.056 0.071

composition of the overall uncertainty is di§erent. The shock "2, which can only be observed

through bank relationship and information acquisition, is relatively more volatile in the EA

than in the US, while the standard deviation of the productivity factor "1; which is known

to ...rms at the time of their ...nancing decisions, is larger in the US (.054) than in the EA

(.012). This is also true for the standard deviation of the ...rst idiosyncratic shock relative

to the standard deviation of the overall uncertain productivity factor, "1=( "2 + "3); which takes the value of .07 for the US and .01 for the EA. Finally, notice that in the calibrated

model of the EA, banks are able to disclose substantially more information about ...rms than

in the model of the US. The signal-to-variance ratio

2 "2

=(

2 "2

+

2 "3

)

takes

the

value

of

.36

in

the EA and only .04 in the US. This is counteracted by higher information acquisition costs in

the EA relative to the US, being respectively .134 and .059. However, the measure of overall

e¢ ciency of banks in acquiring information about ...rms, "2 ; equals 2.2 for the US and 3.6 for

the EA, suggesting relatively higher e¢ ciency of european banks.

Notice that "1 provides a measure of public information available in the ...nancial market, i.e. the information known to ...rms and FIs before signing the contract. A larger "1 allows FIs to better discriminate ...rms according to their risk. Credit worthy ...rms are those that,

30

having experienced a high realization of the ...rst shock, face a relatively low risk of default at the end of the period. On the other hand, "2 provides a measure of the amount of private information, which is costly to acquire and can only be obtained by banks.
Overall, the model suggests that the exibility provided by banks and their information acquisition role is more valuable for ...rms in the EA than in the US. Moreover, the model points to a relatively higher e¢ ciency of banking services in the EA. These factors provide a major explanation for the larger role of bank ...nance relative to bond ...nance in the EA.
5.2.2 E§ects of di§erences in ...nancial structures on allocations
To assess the quantitative importance of the ...nancial structure for the macroeconomy, we build two alternative versions of the model described above and calibrate them on US data. The versions we consider capture ...nancial di§erences to various extents.
Alternative I. This is a model with no ex-ante heterogeneity and a single type of FI, as in Carlstrom and Fuerst (2001). It is obtained by setting ; "1 and "2 close to zero.18 The parameter is chosen to replicate the ...rm's debt to equity ratio, while ; "3 and are set to replicate the aggregate default rates, average risk premia and investment to GDP ratios predicted by the benchmark US model.
Alternative II. This is a model with ex-ante heterogeneity and a single type of FI. It is built by setting and "2 close to zero; in which case no ...rm chooses to raise bank ...nance. The parameter is chosen to match the ...rm's debt to equity ratio, while ; "3 and are set to replicate the aggregate default rates, average risk premia and investment to GDP ratios predicted by the benchmark US model. Finally, "1 is set to the same value obtained in the benchmark US model.
Table 8 lists the parameters selected for the two alternative versions and compare them with those of our benchmark model (reported in the last column).
Table 9 compares the predictions of the three model versions for the US. In model US I, with no heterogeneity and one instrument of external ...nance, all ...rms produce and raise ...nance from CMFs. To match the ...nancial facts, the calibration procedure selects lower
18 The values are not exactly zero because, when = "1 = "2 = 0; expected utility from producing using CMF ...nance or bank ...nance are identical. The numerical procedure is then unable to solve for the thresholds sb; sc and sd:
31

entrepreneurial e§ort, ; and lower standard deviation of the unobserved shock, "3; than in model US II and in the benchmark US model: The reason is that a positive "1 corresponds to higher disclosure of public information in the ...nancial market, which allows FIs to discriminate ...rms according to their risk. In this case, a larger "3 is needed to generate the observed average risk premia and default rates. A lower entrepreneurial e§ort is needed to generate the same investment to GDP ratio, because expected returns from production change due to the lower standard deviation of the unobserved productivity factor.

Table 8: Parameter values in alternative versions of the model Parameters model US I model US II model US

0.006

0.006

0.059

0.338

0.380

0.421

0.968

0.920

0.928

1.410

1.410

1.410

"1

0.006

0.054

0.054

"2

0.006

0.006

0.131

"3

0.550

0.600

0.645

Notice that the introduction of ex-ante heterogeneity without the possibility of using alternative instruments of external ...nance, as in model US II, has minor e§ects on the shares of consumption, investment and monitoring costs in output. The model with ex-ante heterogeneity experiences a higher per-capita GDP, since the availability of public information allows ...rms to assess ex-ante their risk of default and possibly to abstain from production. The average risk premium charged by FIs to producing ...rms is thus lower, despite the higher default rates reecting the larger standard deviation of the overall uncertain productivity factor. Thus, per-capita GDP rises, though to a limited extent.
The combination of ex-ante heterogeneity and multiple instruments of external ...nance has larger e§ects on allocations. When two instruments of external ...nance are available, a higher share of ...rms decides to approach a FI. By choosing banks, ...rms with high risk of default can acquire information about the uncertain productivity factor, postponing their decision
32

on whether or not to borrow and produce. The average risk premium falls and production increases further.

Table 9: Alternative models and their predictions

Variable

model US I model US II model US

Bank to bond ...nance 0

0

0.86

Debt to equity

0.41

0.41

0.41

Average risk premium 0.030

0.026

0.025

Average default rate 0.035

0.040

0.046

Share abstain

0.000

0.283

0.104

Share bank

0

0

0.579

Share CMF

1.000

0.717

0.317

Drop-out if banking 0

0

0.509

q

1.370

1.440

1.470

c+e y

0.848

0.850

0.826

I y

0.145

0.134

0.127

ya y

0.007

0.015

0.050

y

0.838

0.842

0.867

Table 10 shows the gap in per-capita GDP that emerges in models with di§erent ...nancial structures. The second row computes the ratio between output from model II and model I, where the only di§erence is the presence of ex-ante heterogeneity. The gap is only 0.5 percentage points. The third row compares the ratio between output from the benchmark model and model II, which share the same degree of ex-ante heterogeneity but di§er in the availability of the instruments of external ...nance. The gap rises to 3 percentage points. The last row shows the ratio between output from the benchmark model and model I, which di§er both in the presence of ex-ante heterogeneity and in the availability of two instruments of external ...nance. The combined e§ects is a gap of 3.5 percentage points.

33

Table 10: Financial structure and per-capita GDP

Di§erences in ...nancial structure Output ratio

ex-ante heterogeneity two instruments of external ...nance

y(I I ) y(I )

= 1:005

y y(I I )

= 1:030

ex-ante heterogeneity two instruments of external ...nance

y y(I )

=

1:035

6 Conclusions
We have presented a dynamic general equilibrium model with agency costs, ex-ante ...rms' heterogeneity and multiple instruments of external ...nance. In this economy, the choice of entrepreneurs among alternative ...nancing instruments determines the overall cost of information asymmetries and credit market frictions. The calibrated model suggests that a larger share of bank ...nance in the EA relative to the US is due to lower availability of public information about ...rms'credit worthiness and to higher e¢ ciency of banks in acquiring this type of information. We also ...nd that di§erences in the ...nancial structure a§ect allocations, leading to non negligible discrepancies in per-capita GDP.
The setup presented in this paper can be extended in various directions. In ongoing research, we develop a monetary dynamic general equilibrium model of the ...nancial structure and ask whether it can replicate the di§erences in the transmission of monetary policy observed in the US and the EA (as documented, for instance, by Angeloni et al (2003)). Information on ...nancial structures is typically regarded as important by central banks. Movements in the policy rate inuence market interest rates, the price of ...nancial assets, and real activity through changes in the ...nancial decisions of consumers and investors. Features of the ...nancial system such as the relative importance of bank loans versus other instruments of external ...nance may thus help to explain di§erences in the transmission of monetary policy.

Appendix
A. Cross-state subsidization
We consider a general class of contracts between banks and ...rms, which specify the threshold level ! (s"2) and the up-front fee c (s"2) that, given s = "1q; maximize the ...rm's expected
34

return across realizations of "2, subject to the project size being a ...xed share of the ...rm's

net worth, the feasibility constraint, the bank breaking even in expectations across states, the

sum of all repayments across ...rms covering the information costs faced by the bank, and the

up-front fee not exceeding the available initial net worth.

The optimal contract is given by the pair !b (s"2) ; c (s"2) that solves the problem

Z

max
c(s"2);!b(s"2)

sd s"2f
s

!b (s"2)

(1

c (s"2))

Z sd

s

2(d"2) +

(1

c (s"2)) 2(d"2)

subject to constraint (7), (15) and

Z sd s"2g
Zs

!b (s"2)

(1

c (s"2))

Z sd

s

2(d"2) +

c (s"2)

(1
sd s

c (s"2)) ( 1) 2(d"2) + Z

c (s"2) 2(d"2)

2(d"2)

(37) (38)

c (s"2) 1 for all "2:

(39)

Denote as (s) ; (s) and (s"2) the Lagrangian multipliers on constraints (37), (38) and

(39) respectively. The ...rst order condition with respect to !b (s"2) is given by

n s"2 f 0 !b (s"2)

h (s) f 0 !b (s"2) +

io !b (s"2) (1 c (s"2))

0; if "2

sd : s (40)

The conditions with respect to c (s"2) are given by n
s"2f !b (s"2) + (s) s"2g !b (s"2) +

o 1 + (s)

(s"2)

1 + (s) + (s)

(s"2)

0;

if

"2

<

sd : s

0; if "2

sd (41) s

The ...rst two constraints of the FI are binding at the optimum. Therefore, (s) and (s)

must be strictly positive. Notice also that condition (40) implies that at the optimum, when

monitoring costs are not zero,

(s) = f 0

f 0 !b (s"2) !b (s"2) + !b (s"2)

> 1;

since f 0 !b < 0 and g0 !b > 0. It follows that (s) + (s) 1 0, and optimality requires

that (s"2) = (s) > 0 or

c (s"2) = 1;

if

"2

<

sd : s

35

Hence, the contract is given by an up-front fee of 100% of the initial net worth, if the ...rm does not produce, and by a threshold for the unobserved shock !b (s"2) and an up-front fee c (s"2) that satisfy (40) and (41), if the ...rm undertakes production. Notice that the threshold !b is contingent on s and on the realization of the observed shock "2; but it does not depend on the realization of the unknown productivity shock, "3: Hence, ...rms have no incentive to mis-report the realization of the shock that cannot be observed by the bank.
The contract is optimal. The bank now uses the net worth of non-producing ...rms to provide part of the external ...nance, at no cost, to producing ...rms. Repayments are minimized and so is the aggregate probability of default and expected monitoring costs. This increases the fraction of output accruing to the entrepreneurs and hence their aggregate consumption. Since entrepreneurs are risk-neutral, cross-subsidization enhances their welfare.

B. The stochastic steady state

We denote steady state variables by dropping the time subscript. The unique steady state can be obtained as follows. First, we ...nd it convenient to specify one of the endogenous variables, q, as exogenous and to treat as endogenous. For each value of q; we can then compute r; w; and c by solving the equations

1= q= 1=

(1
w f(1

+ r) 11
r
+ r)F ("1q)g

c = w:

To compute the overall expected pro...ts F ("1q); given by the steady state version of (27), we use the following procedure. First, under our distributional assumptions about the productivity

shocks "1; "2 and "3, we can use some results from the optimal contract literature (see the

appendix of Bernanke et al (1999)),

'!

!j

1 = ' (x) !j

f (!j) = 1 (x ) !j [1

(x)]

g(!j) = (x ) + !j !j +

(x) ;

where ' and denote the standard normal, x log !j+0:5 2 and j = b; c: Second, we solve numerically the condition sg(!j (s)) = 1 to obtain the function !j(s). The function !b(s)

36

for bank-...nanced ...rms is derived by de...ning s = "1"2q and by using the variance

2 "3

of

the

log-normal distribution. The function !c(s) for CMF-...nanced ...rms is derived by de...ning

s = "1q and by using the variance

2 "2

+

2 "3

.

The

cuto§ value

for

proceeding

with

the

bank

loan is found by solving numerically the condition sdf (!b(sd))

= 1: Using sd; it is then

possible to compute the expected utility for the bank-...nanced entrepreneur, F b(s), where

s = "1q. The expected utility for the CMF-...nanced entrepreneur can be computed as F c(s) = [sf (!c(s)) ] : With this, it is possible to calculate the overall return F (s) to entrepreneurial

investment,

the

thresholds

sb

and

sc;

and

the

ratios

x z

;

K x

and

l x

;

as

given

by

x= z

x (q; sb; sc; sd)

(1

+ r)

where the function

K1 x= r
l= ; xw x ( ) is the steady state version of the function de...ned in Appendix C.

Now write the budget constraint of the household as

c = w l + (r ) k ;

zz

z

where

l lx z = xz;

and k Kx = 1: z xz

Then, compute z

as z =

c
c

and use it to compute the aggregate variables n; x; K; l; k and c:

z

Finally, use the steady state version of equations (29) and (31) to compute y and e; and of the

resource constraint (36) to compute ya:

The calibration procedure selects values for ; ; ; ; "1; "2; "3 that minimize the squared log-deviation of the ...rst moments generated by the model from those obtained in the data.

In the US model, the targets for the debt to equity ratio, the ratio of bank to bond ...nance,

the average annual default rate, the risk premium on bonds, the risk premium on loans, the

investment to output ratio and the parameter are respectively .41, .75, .039, .027, .025, .192

and .97. In the model of the EA, the targets for the investment to GDP ratio and for are

provided by the values obtained in the calibrated model of the US. The targets for the debt

to equity ratio, the ratio of bank ...nance to bond ...nance, the average annual default rate, the

37

risk premium on bonds and the risk premium on loans are set respectively at .61, 7.3, .039, .027, .022.

C. Aggregation

De...ne

Z sc Z

Z

x (qt; sb; sc; sd)

qt (1
sb sd

) 2(d"2) 1(d"1) +

1(d"1)

sc

qt "1qt

qt

Z sc Z

Z

y (qt; sb; sc; sd)

qt (1
sb sd

)"1"2 2(d"2) 1(d"1) + "1 1(d"1) sc

qt "1qt

qt

Z sc Z

Z

a (qt; sb; sc; sd)

qt sb

(1
sd

)"1"2 3 !b("1"2qt)

2(d"2) 1(d"1)+

2 3 (!c("1qt)) "1

sc

qt "1qt

qt

1(d"1);

where 2 3 is the distribution function for the product ! = "2"3. Then, total demand for

funds, xt; total output including agency costs, yt; and total output lost to agency costs, yta,

are given by equations (28), (29) and (30) in the text.

Now let #b ("1; qt; sd) be the average pro...ts per unit of net worth of the bank-...nanced

entrepreneurs, given the shock "1; aggregate information qt; and threshold sd :

#b ("1; qt; sd) = (1

"Z
) sd "1"2qtf
"1 qt

!b("1"2qt)

#

2(d"2) +

2

(

sd "1qt

)

:

Also, let #c ("1; qt) be the average pro...ts per unit of net worth of the CMF-...nanced entrepre-

neurs, given the ...rst idiosyncratic shock "1; and aggregate information qt :

#c ("1; qt) = "1qtf (!c("1qt)) :

Finally, let # (qt; sb; sc; sd) nt be the aggregate pro...ts of the entrepreneurial sector, where

# (qt; sb; sc; sd) =

1

(

sb qt

)

+

Z sc qt sb

#b ("1; qt; sd)

qt

Z
1(d"1) + #c ("1; qt) sc qt

1(d"1):

The aggregate budget constraint for the entrepreneurs can then be written as equation (31) in

the text.

38

Figure 1: Steady state properties 39

Figure 2: Steady state properties 40

Figure 3: Steady state properties 41

Figure 4: Sensitivity analysis 42

Figure 5: Sensitivity analysis 43

References
[1] Alderson, Michael J. and Betker, Brian L."Liquidation Costs and Capital Structure." Journal of Financial Economics, 1995, 39(1), pp. 45-69.
[2] Altman, Edward I. "A Further Investigation of the Bankruptcy Cost Question." Journal of Finance, 1984, Vol. 39 (4), pp. 1067-89.
[3] Ammer, John and Packer, Frank. "How consistent are credit ratings: a geographic and sectorial analysis of default risk." Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Papers, No. 668, June 2000.
[4] Angeloni, Ignazio, Kashyap, Anil and Mojon, Benoit. "The output composition puzzle: a di§erence in the monetary transmission mechanism in the euro area and the US." NBER Working Paper No. 9985, 2003.
[5] Bernanke, Ben S. and Gertler, Mark. "Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations." American Economic Review, 1989, LXXIX, pp. 14-31.
[6] Bernanke, Ben S., Gertler, Mark and Gilchrist, Simon. "The Financial Accelerator in a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework." In: Taylor, John B. and Woodford, Michael, eds. Handbook of macroeconomics. Volume 1C. Handbooks in Economics, vol. 15. Amsterdam; New York and Oxford: Elsevier Science, North-Holland, 1999, pp. 1341-93.
[7] Carey, Mark and Nini, Greg. "Is the corporate loan market globally integrated? A pricing puzzle." Mimeo, 2004, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC.
[8] Carlstrom, Charles T., and Fuerst, Timothy. "Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Cycle Fluctuations: A Computable General Equilibrium Analysis." American Economic Review, 1997, 87(5), pp. 893-910.
[9] Carlstrom, Charles T., and Fuerst, Timothy. "Agency Costs and Business Cycles." Economic Theory, 1998, 12, pp. 583-597.
[10] Carlstrom, Charles T., and Fuerst, Timothy. "Monetary Shocks, Agency Costs and Business Cycles."Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 2001, 54(0),pp. 1-27.
[11] Cecchetti, Stephen G.: "Legal structure, ...nancial structure and the monetary policy transmission mechanism." NBER Working Paper, No. 7151, June 1999. 44

[12] Chemmanur, Thomas J. and Fulghieri, Paolo. "Reputation, Renegotiation, and the Choice between Bank Loans and Publicly Traded Debt."Review of Financial Studies, 1994, 7(3), pp. 475-506.
[13] Christiano, Lawrence, Motto, Roberto and Rostagno, Massimo. "The Great Depression and the Friedman and Schwartz Hypothesis." ECB Working Paper Series, 2004, n. 326.
[14] Cooley, Thomas F. and Quadrini, Vincenzo."Monetary Policy and the Financial Decisions of Firms." Mimeo, 1999.
[15] Ehrmann, Michael, Giambacorta, Leonardo, Martinez-Pages, Jorge and Andreas Worms." Financial systems and the role of banks in monetary policy transmission in the euro area." In: Angeloni, Ignazio, Kashyap, Anil and Mojon, Benoit, eds. Monetary Policy Transmission in the Euro Area, 2003, Cambridge University Press.
[16] English, William and William Nelson. "Bank Risk Rating of Business Loans." Mimeo, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, US, 1998.
[17] Faia, Ester. "Monetary Policy in a World with Di§erent Financial Systems."ECB Working Paper 183, 2002.
[18] Gale, Dale and Hellwig, Martin. "Incentive-Compatible Debt Contracts: The One-Period Problem." The Review of conomic Studies, 1985, 52(4), pp. 647-663.
[19] Helwege, Jean and Kleiman, Paul. "Understanding Aggregate Deafault Rates of High Yield Bonds."Current Issues in Economics and Finance, 2(6), May 1996. Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
[20] Holstrom, Bengt and Tirole, Jean. "Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and the Real sector." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1997, CXII(3), pp. 663-691.
[21] Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and Moore, John. "Credit cycles."Journal of Political Economy, 1997, 105(2), pp. 211-48.
[22] Mahajan, Arvind, and Fraser, Donald. "Dollar Eurobond pricing and US bond pricing." Journal of International Business Studies, 1986, 17, pp. 21-37.
[23] Masulis, Ronald. W. "The impact of Capital Structure Change on Firm Value: Some Estimates." Journal of Finance, 1983, 38, pp. 107-26. 45

[24] Moody's Investors Service. "Relative Default Rates on Corporate Loans and Bonds." Special Comment, September 2003.
[25] Santos, JoØao, A.C. and Tsatsaronis, Kostas. "The cost of barriers to entry: evidence from the market for corporate euro bond underwriting." BIS Working Papers, No. 134, September 2003.
[26] Townsend, Robert M. "Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly State Veri...cation." Journal of Economic Theory, 1979, 21(2), pp. 265-93.
[27] Warner, Jerald. "Bankruptcy Costs: Some Evidence." Journal of Finance, 1977, 32(2), pp. 337-48.
46

SFB 649 Discussion Paper Series
For a complete list of Discussion Papers published by the SFB 649, please visit http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de.
001 "Nonparametric Risk Management with Generalized Hyperbolic Distributions" by Ying Chen, Wolfgang H‰rdle and Seok-Oh Jeong, January 2005.
002 "Selecting Comparables for the Valuation of the European Firms" by Ingolf Dittmann and Christian Weiner, February 2005.
003 "Competitive Risk Sharing Contracts with One-sided Commitment" by Dirk Krueger and Harald Uhlig, February 2005.
004 "Value-at-Risk Calculations with Time Varying Copulae" by Enzo Giacomini and Wolfgang H‰rdle, February 2005.
005 "An Optimal Stopping Problem in a Diffusion-type Model with Delay" by Pavel V. Gapeev and Markus Reiﬂ, February 2005.
006 "Conditional and Dynamic Convex Risk Measures" by Kai Detlefsen and Giacomo Scandolo, February 2005.
007 "Implied Trinomial Trees" by Pavel CÌzek and Karel Komor·d, February 2005.
008 "Stable Distributions" by Szymon Borak, Wolfgang H‰rdle and Rafal Weron, February 2005.
009 "Predicting Bankruptcy with Support Vector Machines" by Wolfgang H‰rdle, Rouslan A. Moro and Dorothea Sch‰fer, February 2005.
010 "Working with the XQC" by Wolfgang H‰rdle and Heiko Lehmann, February 2005.
011 "FFT Based Option Pricing" by Szymon Borak, Kai Detlefsen and Wolfgang H‰rdle, February 2005.
012 "Common Functional Implied Volatility Analysis" by Michal Benko and Wolfgang H‰rdle, February 2005.
013 "Nonparametric Productivity Analysis" by Wolfgang H‰rdle and Seok-Oh Jeong, March 2005.
014 "Are Eastern European Countries Catching Up? Time Series Evidence for Czech Republic, Hungary, and Poland" by Ralf Br¸ggemann and Carsten Trenkler, March 2005.
015 "Robust Estimation of Dimension Reduction Space" by Pavel CÌzek and Wolfgang H‰rdle, March 2005.
016 "Common Functional Component Modelling" by Alois Kneip and Michal Benko, March 2005.
017 "A Two State Model for Noise-induced Resonance in Bistable Systems with Delay" by Markus Fischer and Peter Imkeller, March 2005.
SFB 649, Spandauer Straﬂe 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

018 "Yxilon ≠ a Modular Open-source Statistical Programming Language" by Sigbert Klinke, Uwe Ziegenhagen and Yuval Guri, March 2005.
019 "Arbitrage-free Smoothing of the Implied Volatility Surface" by Matthias R. Fengler, March 2005.
020 "A Dynamic Semiparametric Factor Model for Implied Volatility String Dynamics" by Matthias R. Fengler, Wolfgang H‰rdle and Enno Mammen, March 2005.
021 "Dynamics of State Price Densities" by Wolfgang H‰rdle and Zdenk Hl·vka, March 2005.
022 "DSFM fitting of Implied Volatility Surfaces" by Szymon Borak, Matthias R. Fengler and Wolfgang H‰rdle, March 2005.
023 "Towards a Monthly Business Cycle Chronology for the Euro Area" by Emanuel Mˆnch and Harald Uhlig, April 2005.
024 "Modeling the FIBOR/EURIBOR Swap Term Structure: An Empirical Approach" by Oliver Blaskowitz, Helmut Herwartz and Gonzalo de Cadenas Santiago, April 2005.
025 "Duality Theory for Optimal Investments under Model Uncertainty" by Alexander Schied and Ching-Tang Wu, April 2005.
026 "Projection Pursuit For Exploratory Supervised Classification" by Eun-Kyung Lee, Dianne Cook, Sigbert Klinke and Thomas Lumley, May 2005.
027 "Money Demand and Macroeconomic Stability Revisited" by Andreas Schabert and Christian Stoltenberg, May 2005.
028 "A Market Basket Analysis Conducted with a Multivariate Logit Model" by Yasemin Boztu and Lutz Hildebrandt, May 2005.
029 "Utility Duality under Additional Information: Conditional Measures versus Filtration Enlargements" by Stefan Ankirchner, May 2005.
030 "The Shannon Information of Filtrations and the Additional Logarithmic Utility of Insiders" by Stefan Ankirchner, Steffen Dereich and Peter Imkeller, May 2005.
031 "Does Temporary Agency Work Provide a Stepping Stone to Regular Employment?" by Michael Kvasnicka, May 2005.
032 "Working Time as an Investment? ≠ The Effects of Unpaid Overtime on Wages, Promotions and Layoffs" by Silke Anger, June 2005.
033 "Notes on an Endogenous Growth Model with two Capital Stocks II: The Stochastic Case" by Dirk Bethmann, June 2005.
034 "Skill Mismatch in Equilibrium Unemployment" by Ronald Bachmann, June 2005.
SFB 649, Spandauer Straﬂe 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

035 "Uncovered Interest Rate Parity and the Expectations Hypothesis of the Term Structure: Empirical Results for the U.S. and Europe" by Ralf Br¸ggemann and Helmut L¸tkepohl, April 2005.
036 "Getting Used to Risks: Reference Dependence and Risk Inclusion" by Astrid Matthey, May 2005.
037 "New Evidence on the Puzzles. Results from Agnostic Identification on Monetary Policy and Exchange Rates." by Almuth Scholl and Harald Uhlig, July 2005.
038 "Discretisation of Stochastic Control Problems for Continuous Time Dynamics with Delay" by Markus Fischer and Markus Reiss, August 2005.
039 "What are the Effects of Fiscal Policy Shocks?" by Andrew Mountford and Harald Uhlig, July 2005.
040 "Optimal Sticky Prices under Rational Inattention" by Bartosz Makowiak and Mirko Wiederholt, July 2005.
041 "Fixed-Prize Tournaments versus First-Price Auctions in Innovation Contests" by Anja Schˆttner, August 2005.
042 "Bank finance versus bond finance: what explains the differences between US and Europe?" by Fiorella De Fiore and Harald Uhlig, August 2005.
SFB 649, Spandauer Straﬂe 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

