BERLIN

SFB 6 4 9 E C O N O M I C R I S K

SFB 649 Discussion Paper 2005-057
An empirical test of theories of price valuation
using a semiparametric approach, reference
prices, and accounting for heterogeneity
Yasemin Boztu* Lutz Hildebrandt**
* Institute of Marketing, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany ** Institute of Marketing, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".
http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de ISSN 1860-5664
SFB 649, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin

Yasemin Boztu1 and Lutz Hildebrandt2
An empirical test of theories of price valuation using a semiparametric approach, reference prices,
and accounting for heterogeneity
JEL Classification: C14, C23, C25, D12, M31
1 Assistant professor, Humboldt University of Berlin, Institute of Marketing, Spandauer Str. 1, 10178 Berlin, Germany, Phone: ++49-30-2093-5707, Fax: ++49-30-2093-5675, boztug@wiwi.hu-berlin.de 2 Professor, Humboldt University of Berlin, Institute of Marketing, Spandauer Str. 1, 10178 Berlin, Germany, Phone: ++49-30-2093-5691, Fax: ++49-30-2093-5675, hildebr@wiwi.hu-berlin.de Financial support by the German Research Foundation (DFG) through the Sonderforschungsbereich 649, and for Boztug by way of research project #B01952/1 is gratefully acknowledged.

An empirical test of theories of price valuation using a semiparametric approach, reference prices,
and accounting for heterogeneity
Abstract In this paper we estimate and empirically test different behavioral theories of consumer reference price formation. Two major theories are proposed to model the reference price reaction: assimilation contrast theory and prospect theory. We assume that different consumer segments will use different reference prices. The study builds on earlier research by Kalyanaram and Little (1994); however, in contrast to their work, we use parametric and semiparametric approaches to detect the structure of the underlying data sets. The different models are tested using a program module in GAUSS that was able to account for heterogeneity. The model types were calibrated by a simulation study. The calibrated modules were then used to analyze real market data.
1

Several studies have shown that ignoring reference prices leads to incorrect conclusions about consumer behavior in buying decision situations (e.g., Kalyanaram and Winer, 1995). There is a wide body of literature dealing with different aspects of reference price formation and its impact on price evaluation. A second stream of research uses a model-oriented approach but builds on real buying behavior data: reference prices are specified and estimated based on scanner panel data. In this paper, we will follow this second approach. Modeling reference price reaction with scanner panel data leaves several issues unsolved. First, there is no general consensus on how to derive reference prices from behavioral data (e.g., scanner panel data) (see Winer (1988)). Second, there is no accepted dominant theory about how (or even if) the consumer uses a reference price. Third, the true function of reference price reaction is unknown.
With respect to the latter problem, Kalyanaram and Winer (1995) called for a comparison between different theories (especially prospect theory vs. assimilation contrast theory) to find an acceptable solution but, until now, this call has been answered in only limited fashion. Our research will contribute by applying a non- or semiparametric approach. Instead of testing a certain prespecified response function with the data, our modeling approach of the consumer choice process is driven by the structure of the data. This procedure contrasts with the common method of assuming a theory, which is then modeled, and finally tested. However, it is well known that interpreting parameters of misspecified models leads to wrong results and thus to wrong recommendations for managers, a situation that can arise all too easily when using natural data sets because the researcher does not know the correct form a priori. By contrast, in our approach, we first detect the model structure regarding different complementary theories by using a semiparametric method. Different specifications of reference price conceptions based on buying data are evaluated. We also focus on a valid determination of the price effect in the underlying choice model because, in most studies, price has the largest effect on brand choice. We also
2

consider different types of consumer heterogeneity. Omitting heterogeneity may lead to the estimation of nonvalid parameters. To incorporate all conditions into our approach, we use nonparametric procedures in combination with common parametric methods.
We believe our research will be of both theoretical and practical relevance. Theories, even those based on real data, are worse than useless, at least in our view, if researchers cannot or will not make any claims about the theory's correctness, a problem that is even more critical if the theory is to be used for a practical purpose, such as making recommendations for real-world decisions. This is a pitfall we are determined to avoid.
The paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we first present the theoretical background of the reference price concept and its measurement. Next, we describe the methodological approach of using nonparametric and parametric models. The empirical section presents a simulation based on our methodology. We continue our empirical work with an estimation based on real data and show that different types of consumers (loyal or nonloyal) use different reference price systems. We end with a discussion of our results.
THE PROBLEM In research on reference price effects, prospect theory is the most widely used approach to explain consumer behavior. During the more than 10 years this theory has been around, it has become the dominate approach for modeling data-based consumer reactions to price changes. However, the question of whether prospect theory truly is the appropriate approach for modeling consumer behavior has been insufficiently debated even though it is well known that a misspecified model will lead to wrong parameter estimates. In most publications based on prospect theory, validation of the theoretical concept is not mentioned.
3

To obtain valid results, several modeling problems regarding reference price theory need to be solved appropriately. First, the functional form of the price response as a part of the utility function must be specified. For example, prospect theory assumes a linear form divided in two parts with a kink at zero. A second problem involves exact specification of this kink, which is not necessarily a point but could also be defined as a zone of indifference. A third important problem concerns whether all consumers behave the same or whether there may be different price responses by different consumers. And last, but not least, how should the reference price itself be modeled? Are consumers able to recall prices from previous purchases or are they mainly influenced by the price at the point of sale?
Prospect theory has appropriate solutions to some of these questions. For example, it is possible to incorporate heterogeneity by estimating different price response parameters. Also, the theory can integrate internal or external approaches to describing the empirical specification of a reference price. Finally, prospect theory gives clear instructions on how to define the price response curve, which is separated in a two-sided graph with a loss part and a gain part. This distinction in a kinked form at zero leads to a point of indifference.
It is exactly at this point that the limitations of prospect theory become obvious. The researcher is forced to use a two-tailed curve; no other functional form will work. Additionally, the theory does not permit a zone of indifference, so the researcher cannot allow the consumer to be unsure about reference points or to have no reaction to small price changes.
Our approach is based on the idea that it may be possible to choose between two theories, namely, prospect theory and assimilation contrast theory, when describing consumer behavior. In contrast to prospect theory, assimilation contrast theory allows for a three-tailed curve, which includes a zone of indifference. However, similar to prospect theory, heterogeneity can be included in a model of assimilation contrast theory, as can different reference price formulations.
4

Interestingly, nearly all experimental-based approaches in the field of reference price theory use the assimilation contrast theory. The main problem of using this theory is determining the width of the zone of indifference sufficient to estimate a proper model. We recommend the following two-stage procedure. First, estimate a reference price model with a nonparametric price response function without any reference to prospect or assimilation contrast theory a priori. At the same time, determine the width of the zone of indifference based on a free estimation of the functional form of the price response. Second, reestimate a parametric approach with the results regarding the correct theory of the underlying data, and, if necessary, use the nonparametrically determined width of the indifference zone for the model. This approach leads to a data-based model while simultaneously testing empirically for the proper theory to describe consumer behavior.
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
The reference price concept
The reference price concept builds on the relative perception of price changes. It has been shown that consumers in general do not only use the absolute value of price in their decisions but also use a reference point for the valuation of different prices in their purchase decisions (e.g., Biswas et al. 1993; Gijsbrechts 1993; Kalyanaram and Winer 1995). This difference between the absolute price and the reference point, or reference price, is used as an additional variable in choice models to create a more realistic description of consumer behavior.
There are several theories concerned with reference price structure (Winer 1988). The two most-used approaches are prospect theory (Kahneman and Tversky 1979) and assimilation contrast theory (Sherif and Hovland 1961). The two theories differ in their assumptions about the
5

influence of the reference price. Much research has been based on prospect theory even though it is known from consumer price behavior that the reference price appears to be a region and not a point (e.g., Emery 1969; Monroe 1971; Sawyer and Dickson 1984; Klein and Oglethorpe 1987; Kalwani and Yim 1992). Additionally, a growing body of empirical study confirms the existence of a latitude of acceptance, often called a price threshold (e.g., Kalyanaram and Little 1994; Han et al. 2001; Raman and Bass 2002; Pauwels et al. 2004).
Assimilation contrast theory. Sherif and Hovland (1961) introduced assimilation contrast theory, in which it is assumed that there is a range of indifference around the reference point. A stimulus inside this range is perceived as smaller than its real value, an effect also known as the assimilation effect. Assimilation contrast theory was applied to price perception by Sherif (1963). The function of price has a cubic form, which means that a price inside the range is tolerated (Wricke et al. 2000). A stimulus outside the range is perceived as larger than its real value, a phenomenon known as the contrast effect. There are different assumptions about the influence of prices outside the range. Some researchers assume that these stimuli do not have any effect on the reference point; others think that a price outside the range, even though rejected, does have an influence on the reference price. For a detailed discussion, see Urbany et al. (1988). Lichtenstein and Bearden (1989) look at the range of acceptance with regard to the expected "common" market price. They explicitly assume that the range of indifference around the reference price will not be symmetrical.
In contrast, Kalyanaram and Little (1994) built a model based on assimilation contrast theory integrated in a consumer choice model and assumed a symmetric range of indifference around the reference price. They also included price variability when determining the width of the price range. This brings us to one of the greatest difficulties in using assimilation contrast
6

theory to build a choice model, which is that, usually, the width  of the range of indifference is unknown and must be estimated from the data or determined on the basis of experiments or questionnaires. We will address this problem in more detail later in the paper.
Prospect theory. In contrast to assimilation contrast theory, prospect theory (Kahneman and Tversky 1979) assumes a range of zero around the reference price; the "zone" thus becomes a point. Prospect theory is used to describe decisions under risk (Edwards 1996). The price decision can be seen as a risky decision (Urbany and Dickson 1990) and so the concepts of prospect theory can be used to evaluate prices. With Thaler's (1985) introduction of the theory of mental accounting, it became possible to generate different price scenarios as well.
The key points of prospect theory have to do with the different valuation of gains and losses, which are defined, respectively, as a positive or negative value of the reference point. It is assumed that the value function describing the difference is concave for gains and convex for losses. Also, the function is steeper for losses than for gains. This behavior is called loss aversion. For a more detailed description of prospect theory, the reader is referred to Edwards (1996), Kahneman and Tversky (1979), Thaler (1980), or Tversky and Kahneman (1981). Using the concept of mental accounting, the value function of prospect theory is expanded. The total utility of a purchase is divided between an acquisition utility and a transaction utility. The latter can be described as the difference between the reference price and the paid price.
Empirical modeling. The reference price is a latent construct that cannot be measured directly. It can be determined only by experiment or by asking consumers about their expected price (for an overview, see, e.g., Estelami et al. 2001), procedures that have their own problems. Scanner data do not provide this sort of information; however, such data do provide a different
7

type of information that can be used to estimate a reference price. There are two ways of accomplishing this. One method uses prices paid in the past and the other uses current prices. In the first approach, it is assumed that consumers use prices paid in the past to build their reference price; this is called an "internal reference price" (e.g., Winer 1986). In the second approach, it is assumed that consumers use prices at the point of sale, which are actual prices; this is called an "external reference price" (e.g., Hardie et al. 1993). For an empirical comparison of both methods, see, for example, Briesch et al. (1997b).
Obviously, only consumers able to recall past prices can use the internal reference price. These people are considered to be highly involved shoppers or price-sensitive consumers. These consumers have an internal reference price for each separate brand of merchandise. There are various formulations for the quantification of an internal reference price, but none of them have become standard (e.g., Wricke et al. 2000).
The external reference price is based on current prices at the point of purchase. It is not brand specific, but only category specific. It is assumed that the consumer does not use any information on past purchases, perhaps because he or she cannot remember past prices paid or does not trust his or her memory of them. Therefore, this type of consumer uses only information that has become available during the current shopping trip. As with the internal reference price, the literature provides no common calculation method for an external reference price.
Research question
Table 1 summarizes all possible model type and theory combinations. We sorted the models by their underlying behavioral theories, the reference price concept utilized, and by type of model specification. The first model based on a reference price concept was introduced by
8

Winer (1986), who used only the internal reference price construct. We mention only a few of the many studies based on prospect theory. This model type rarely uses controls, seemingly assuming that the theoretical construct is in complete agreement with consumers' real behavior. We will take a critical look at this assumption later in our paper.
---------------------------------- Table 1 about here.
----------------------------------
Assimilation contrast theory within a parametric estimation is presented by Kalyanaram and Little (1994). They focus on internal reference price constructs. A limited comparison is made between prospect theory and assimilation contrast theory.
Models based on a semiparametric approach are estimated by Abe (1998). In estimating the width of the indifference zone, he uses a model similar to assimilation contrast theory. His approach can be regarded as a semiparametric extension of Kalyanaram and Little (1994). However, Abe (1998) uses only an internal reference price specification and does not account for heterogeneity. Also, there is no comparison made between prospect and assimilation contrast theory. A recent approach of Pauwels et al. (2004) uses internal and external reference prices, using only a parametric approach, and, again, there is no comparison made between the two theories.
As Table 1 clearly shows, numerous research questions (marked by an × ) are still unresolved. Our study will fill in some of these gaps. We decide data-driven which theory is the appropriate one. We investigate which model is best when it is matched (or even not matched) with simulated and real data. Our aim is to be able to tell which theory will be the appropriate one
9

in specific situations or for specific consumers. From the methodological point of view, we build up a semiparametric model that is able to create a model based on either prospect theory or on assimilation contrast theory. We use different internal and external reference price specifications, making our model much broader than those used in most reference price studies. Our most important contribution is the comparison of prospect theory with assimilation contrast theory using both parametric and semiparametric approachs.
THE METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH Based on disaggregated data, we use a consumer-based approach. The general model structure can be described as
Uin = VNin + Nin . systematic utility random component
Different assumptions can be specified for the systematic and random components. Both components can be modeled in a parametric or a nonparametric way, resulting in four model types. We will focus on only two models. In one of these, both components are described in a parametric way and the model can be formulated with a multinomial logit model. The other model we focus on is a semiparametric one resulting from a nonparametric formulation of the systematic part and a parametric modeling of the random component. A suitable model description for this type is a generalized additive model.
Parametric approach A well-known disaggregated choice model is the multinomial logit model (MNL), which was introduced in the marketing context by Guadagni and Little (1983). Here, both the systematic component and the random component are modeled in a parametric way. For the difference of the
10

errors, a Gumbel distribution is assumed. The model structure is linear-additive. A common

MNL is:

(1)

Prn(i) =

exp( xin ) , jCn exp( x jn )

with Prn(i) the probability of individual n to buy product i, xin the explanatory variables of product i for consumer n, and ß the parameter to be estimated. The approach is estimated with

maximum-likelihood.

Semiparametric approach An alternative approach to the MNL model could be a non- or semiparametric method. Here, we focus on a generalized additive model (GAM) (Hastie and Tibshirani 1990). This method has several advantages. The error structure can be modeled as in the MNL model, thus making possible the comparison of the estimation results. The systematic component of a GAM has, as does the MNL, an additive structure. The main difference from a MNL is a onedimensional nonparametric function for each explanatory variable, in contrast to a linear modeling of the explanatory variables in a MNL. The formal model is presented in Equation (2).

(2)

E[Y

|

X

=

x]

=

G

 

f

p

(

x

p

)

 

p 

with

G

=

1

+

1 exp(-

x)

Here, fp are one-dimensional nonparametric functions to be estimated and xp are the explanatory variables; G is called a link function. By specifying G as in Equation (2), the error

term distribution of the GAM is equal to a common MNL approach. The standard GAM is

defined only for continuous explanatory variables. In marketing applications, there are usually

also binary explanatory variables, for example, display or feature. To incorporate these variables,

the common GAM is extended to include a linear-additive component, as in the MNL model, at

11

least for all binary variables. This model type is described in Equation (3).

(3)

E[Y

|

X

=

x] =

G

 

f

p

(

x

p

)

+



x

 

p 

Two different algorithms exist for estimating a GAM. The most common approach is

backfitting, introduced by Friedman and Stuetzle (1981). The method is based on a variance

decomposition of the total variance to all explanatory variables specified in the model. An

alternative method is called marginal integration, where the marginal influences of the

explanatory variables to the response variable are estimated. Due to the empirical focus of our

research, we do not describe the mathematical structure of the estimation procedures in detail but

instead refer the reader to Hastie and Tibshirani (1990) or Linton and Nielsen (1995).

Integration of the reference price concept in a parametric model
Integrating prospect theory into a common choice model means adding two components,
which, respectively describe the loss or gain perceived by the consumer. The pure price
component can be included only in a model with an internal reference price formulation. In
modeling an external reference price approach, the price component has to be excluded due to
strong correlation with the gain and/or loss components (e.g., Hardie et al. 1993). The resulting
model describing the utility Uint of consumer i for product n at time t is shown in Equation (4).
Uint = 0 + 1Pint + 2 (Pint -IRPint)IPint >IR
Pint
Loss
(4) + 3 (IRPint -Pint)IIRPint >
Pint
Gain
+ 4 LOY int + 5 Displ int + 6 Feat int + int
The gain and loss components come into play only when the internal reference price is
larger or smaller than the actual price. All other explanatory variables are included as in a
standard logit model, for example, P for price, LOY for loyalty, as specified by Guadagni and
12

Little (1983), Displ for the binary variable for the existence of display, and, in the same manner, Feat for feature. ß describes all parameters to be estimated including the brand dummies ß0.
In an assimilation contrast model, a mid range, also known as a range of indifference, must be included. Here, we assume that for the contrast effects, we again have loss and gain components (Kalyanaram and Little 1994).3 We make this assumption for two reasons. First, the model based on assimilation contrast theory reduces to a prospect theory model if the mid component (range of indifference) is zero, thus making it easy to compare of two models. Second, even if a range of indifference is assumed, it can be assumed, additionally, that the consumers will display loss aversion.

In the formal representation of the assimilation contrast model (Equation (5)), in addition to the common variables, a parameter,  , is specified.  describes the width of the range of indifference. In the model presented here, we assume a symmetric indifference zone around the price gap (loss minus gain) (e.g., Kalyanaram and Little 1994).

Uint = 0 + 1Pint + 2 (Pint -IRPint )IPint>IRPint +
/2

Loss

(5)

+ 3 (Pint -IRPint )I IRPint -/2<Pint <IRPint +
/2
Mid

+ 4 (IRPint -Pint )IPint<IRPint -
/2

Gain

+ 5 LOY int + 6 Displ int + 7 Featint + int

In a parametric approach, it is nearly impossible to detect  if it is assumed to be nonsymmetrical. Even in the symmetric case, a grid search for  is extensive. One possible way
3 Han et al. (2001), Raman and Bass (2002), and Pauwels et al. (2003) used models with price threshold components. The price threshold models are not clearly based on assimilation contrast theory; they seem to be more data driven (Raman and Bass present some theory, but their model is on an aggregate level and they use only a reference price
13

to find a nonsymmetrical  is to use a nonparametric approach.

Integration of the reference price concept in a semiparametric approach

The semiparametric estimation combines nonparametric and parametric terms in the

specification of the utility function. All continuous explanatory variables can be modeled with a

one-dimensional nonparametric function. In a reference price context, these variables are loyalty,

price gap, and price. Equation (6) does not include a nonparametric function for price because the

price component is used only in models with an internal reference price effect (see the section on

prospect theory above).

(6)

Uint = 0 + 1Pint + f1( pricegapint ) + f2 (LOY int) + 2 Displ int + 3Feat + int

In many models, using a nonparametric function for loyalty leads to a quasi-linear

functional form. The main nonparametric component is the price gap. Estimating the functional

form of the price gap leads to a very flexible form. Therefore, no explicit specification of gain,

loss, or an indifference zone need be made. Additionally, it is not necessary to estimate a

threshold parameter. By inspecting the estimated functional form of the price gap, the researcher

will be able to determine which theory (e.g., prospect or assimilation contrast) is the appropriate one for the estimated data set.4

THE APPLICATION

Simulation study We estimated the semiparametric function using a program written in Gauss. To demonstrate the validity of our estimation, a simulation study was conducted with three goals in

and not the difference between price and the reference price). 4 For example, Pauwels et al. (2003) mentioned that fully nonparametric models have high data requirements, which
14

mind. First, we wanted to demonstrate that using the same theory for simulating and estimating the data set will result in appropriate estimates. Second, we wanted to show what would happen if simulated data based on one theory, for example, assimilation contrast theory, is used in an estimation made with a model using the other theory, vice versa. Third, we wanted to illustrate that if one uses the semiparametric approach, it is not necessary to specify any particular theory; the functional form will be enough to detect the theory underlying the data set.
For the simulation we generated data sets with two different sample sizes: 2,000 and 5,000 purchases for 200 households. Each data set contains three brands and, as explanatory variables, price, promotional price, and feature. The study is similar in design to that of Chang et al. (1999); however, in our study, we included internal or external reference prices and build our model in reference to prospect theory and assimilation contrast theory. In sum, we have eight different data sets, which are estimated based on either the underlying theory, the opposite theory, or with the semiparametric approach, resulting in 24 different results. Variable specifications are laid out in Table 2.
---------------------------------- Table 2 about here.
---------------------------------- For the data set based on assimilation contrast theory, we assumed a nonsymmetrical range of indifference with gain = 0.2 and loss = 0.1. This asymmetric assumption follows from Kalyanaram and Little (1994), who proposed that a nonsymmetrical range is much more plausible than a symmetric one. According to prospect theory, consumers will react more strongly to a loss than to a gain, which leads to the assumption that the indifference zone should be smaller on the loss side than it is on the gain side.
is not true for our approach because we model only one component nonparametrically. 15

Model based on prospect theory. The first simulation study results are from the data sets based on prospect theory. In this article, we document the results for 5,000 observations and the use of an internal reference price. All other results are available on request to the first author. In Table 3 and Figure 1 we present the parametric and nonparametric results.
---------------------------------- Table 3 about here.
---------------------------------- ----------------------------------
Figure 1 about here. ----------------------------------
Table 3 illustrates that when estimating a model based on prospect theory, all true parameter values lie within a 95% approximate confidence interval and are all significant. By using a model based on assimilation contrast theory, the grid search for  leads to an "optimal" value of 0, so the model reduces to one regarding prospect theory. Of course, all assimilation contrast theory parameter estimates are identical to the prospect theory parameters. If we use an approach without any reference price specification, for example, a standard logit model, both estimated parameter values are still significant, but the approximate confidence interval for the price component no longer includes the true parameter.
For the semiparametric model, we specify price and feature in a parametric manner, and the price gap (with loss minus gain) in a nonparametric way. This procedure, and the fact that the estimates are in a nonclosed form, means that the estimation result for price gap can be presented only pictorially, which is done in Figure 1. The parameter estimates are all significant and the approximately confidence interval includes the true parameter values with 95% probability.
16

Figure 1 shows that for the price gap, all estimations are close together, leading to the conclusion that in this case, use of prospect theory is appropriate.
Model based on assimilation contrast theory. Again, we present results only for the data set with 5,000 observations. The indifference zone for the simulated data is asymmetric. Two different models based on assimilation contrast theory were estimated: one with the true asymmetric values for  and one with a symmetric  value, as suggested by Kalyanaram and Little (1994). All parametric estimation results are presented in Table 4.
---------------------------------- Table 4 about here.
----------------------------------
For both estimations based on assimilation contrast theory, we get significant parameter estimates (except for the mid range, as expected), and all approximate confidence intervals include the true parameter values. In the model with the true  values, the estimated parameters are closer to the real values than are the estimates obtained using the symmetric  values; the loglikelihood is also better in this model than in the one with symmetric values for  . In the model with a symmetric indifference zone, we find an optimal width of 0.2, which is smaller than the original value. A look at the estimates resulting from a model based on prospect theory reveals several interesting results. First, every parameter estimate is still significant. Second, the approximate confidence intervals of loss and gain do not include the true parameter values, something that would not be obvious in an application using real data. So, although the significance estimates appear to be a good representation of the data, the estimates are in actuality not even close to the true underlying parameters. Therefore, parametric estimation with the wrong model may still generate significant parameters--despite misspecification.
17

We now turn to the results of the semiparametric approach. Again, both parametrically estimated parameters are significant and their approximate confidence intervals include the true values. The nonparametric estimates are shown in Figure 2.
---------------------------------- Figure 2 about here.
----------------------------------
The functional form of the nonparametric estimate is close to the real values, as is the asymmetric indifference zone; clearly, assimilation contrast theory is at work. Figure 2 illustrates the boundaries of the indifference zone. From the figure, it is obvious that prospect theory's estimates are wrong, especially in the zone around the price gap, which is the most relevant area for price discounts. Assimilation contrast theory's estimation of a too-small symmetric indifference zone is not perfect, either, but it is not as bad as prospect theory estimates.
Several conclusions can be drawn from the simulation study results. Estimating a data set with the correct underlying theory results in significant parameter estimates that also include the true parameters in an approximate confidence interval. Using the "wrong" theory can produce three different results. First, if prospect theory is the underlying theory, even estimating a model based on assimilation contrast theory will lead to correct results because an "optimal" width of zero will be estimated for the indifference zone. Second, and most important, using a prospecttheory-based model for estimation of a data set that resulted from assimilation contrast theory leads to significant parameter estimates, but the approximate confidence interval will not include the true parameters. This fact cannot be detected for a real data set. Third, regardless of which theory is the "correct" one for a data set, the semiparametric estimates will give a clear indication of which model based on which theory should be used. If it turns out that the semiparametric
18

estimates recommend the use of assimilation contrast theory, nonparametric estimates could be applied so as to provide some guidance on the width and even the symmetry of the indifference zone.

Real data set

We next used the Gauss program to estimate the models using real data. The database

consists of purchases of one product category in a micro test market. The data cover 104 weeks

and seven brands of merchandise from a major retail store. During the specified time period, 876

households made 3,647 purchases. For calibration purposes, we split off the data for the first 80

weeks. The remaining 24 weeks are used for validation. The data consisted of purchase

information about the actual price paid and the existence of display and feature actions. From

these data, we constructed the loyalty variable proposed by Guadagni and Little (1983) and for

each reference price concept (internal and external) three different specifications, which are

briefly explained below.

The internal reference price can be based on several alternative concepts of memory. The

price of the last period (e.g., Kalwani et al. 1990) uses only the information about the last

purchase. Here, it is assumed that the consumer does not have or use any price information from

purchases made previous to the last purchase. Formally, it can be described as IRPint = Pint-1 , with i the brand, n the consumer, and t the time index. Consumers using the mean of last prices (e.g.,

Rajendran and Tellis 1994), use not only the last price paid in calculating the internal reference

price, but also all other prices paid until time period T. It is implicitly assumed that the consumer

has a long price memory. T can be set to a specific value, for example, 3 or 4, so only the last 3 or

4

time

periods

are

included in

the

calculation, with

IRPint

=

1 T

T
Pint -
 =1

.

In the weighted

mean of

19

last prices (e.g., Winer 1985), not all former prices have the same weight in the calculation, and to add to the complexity, the weight they will have must be estimated. This form of the internal reference price is similar to loyalty measure introduced by Guadagni and Little (1983) and can be

( )modeled as IRPint = IRPint-1 + 1- 



Pint

-1

-

IRP int -1



.

External reference prices are based on price information at the point of purchase. They are

category specific only. The lowest price in the category (e.g., Biswas and Blair 1991) is often

used as an external reference price because consumers merely focus on lower rather upper price

limits

for

comparison.

Formally,

it

can

be

written

as

ERPnt

=

min i

{Pit

}

.

The

actual

price

of

last

brand bought (e.g., Hardie et al. 1993) is used in cases when consumers cannot remember the last

price paid, but can remember the last brand bought. It can be modeled as ERPnt = Pit if i was bought in t ­ 1. The weighted price with loyalty (e.g., Mazumdar and Papatla 1995) is an extension of the price of the last brand bought. Here, not only the last brand bought, but also all purchased brands, are taken into account in calculating the external reference price. These prices are weighted with the loyalty felt toward each purchased brand. By weighting the actual prices

I
with the loyalty, this type of external reference price can be modeled as ERPnt = LOYint Pit with i =1

( )LOYint =  LOYint-1 + 1-  yint-1 .
In this paper, we present only the reference price specification that leads to the best model fit regarding the log-likelihood value. When we turn to discussing heterogeneity, we will use only the results dealing with the loyalty variable (e.g., Abramson et al. 2000; Kamakura et al. 1996).

Table 5 is a summary of all parametric estimation results without incorporating heterogeneity, except for the loyalty variable. Only the results for the best internal and external

20

reference price formulations are shown: the weighted past prices for the internal reference price and the actual price of the last brand bought for the external reference price. Both reference price formulations are used because it is not obvious which one describes consumer behavior most appropriately.
For ease of comparison, we first look at all estimations using the internal reference price. The parameter estimates for loyalty, display, and feature are very similar for both the model based on prospect theory and the model based on assimilation contrast theory. Larger differences between the models can be seen for all components related to price (price itself, gain, loss, and mid). Most interesting is the highly significant mid region in the assimilation contrast model, for which we found an "optimal" width of 0.2. This implies that it is not its original functional form, which has an insignificant mid region, that is the proper form of assimilation contrast theory, but instead a functional form with a very steep mid region and much flatter edges. This form leads to a model based on prospect theory, but with a slightly different function course. Furthermore, the nonparametric estimation is similar to the model based on assimilation contrast theory, as can be seen in Figure 3.
---------------------------------- Table 5 about here.
---------------------------------- ----------------------------------
Figure 3 about here. ---------------------------------- Looking now at the results for the external reference price, prospect theory appears to be the most appropriate in both parametric models because we find an optimal width of 0 for the
21

indifference zone. From Figure 4, which also displays the nonparametric estimate, it is obvious that all estimates lie very close together.
---------------------------------- Figure 4 about here.
----------------------------------
Consideration of heterogeneity. We now extend our study to estimate the effect of heterogeneity as ignoring it could lead to wrong parameter estimates (e.g., Chang et al. 1999). For a brief presentation of different heterogeneity concepts, the reader is referred to DeSarbo et al. (1999). We follow the approaches of Krishnamurthi and Raj (1991), Krishnamurthi et al. (1992), and Mazumdar and Papatla (1995). These authors make an a priori segmentation of loyal and nonloyal consumers.5 Due to the assumption that loyal consumers are not very price sensitive, we assume that they use an external reference price. Nonloyal consumers are much more price-conscious and thus are able to use an internal reference price. We use the same model type for internal and external reference price formulation as was used in the models without heterogeneity.
In our model formulations, we focus on a segment-specific level. We account for heterogeneity of preference by including the loyalty variable. Heterogeneity of response is captured by brand intercepts; structural heterogeneity through the segmentation of consumers.
In Table 6, we first look at the parametrically estimated results. The model based on
5 We also used a latent class approach (Kamakura and Russell 1989; Jain et al. 1994) limited to two segments, but the results are close to the a priori segmentation. The results of the a priori segmentation can be interpreted more easily so only those results are used in the following. Another reason for not using the latent class approach is that in that method, group membership is only weakly related to secondary drivers data (DeSarbo et al. 1997). Erdem et al. (2001) explicitly demonstrated the problems that arise when using a latent class approach for a reference price model.
22

prospect theory shows different parameter values for both consumer segments, particularly for all price components (e.g., price, loss, and gain) and for the loyalty variable. Compared to the model without heterogeneity (see Table 5), the values for display and feature stayed approximately constant, but loyalty can be seen as a separational index. There are also some differences between the two models for loss and gain; the loss values are bigger, as is the gain value, for the internal reference price model. In the model for loyal consumers (ERP), the gain component is no longer significant.
---------------------------------- Table 6 about here.
----------------------------------
The model based on assimilation contrast theory is similar to the prospect theory model in that all price component values are larger. However, for loyal consumers, gain and the mid component are not significant. The optimal width of the indifference zone is 0.1, which is exactly the mean of 0.2 and 0, the widths of this zone in the models without heterogeneity.
Using a nonparametric estimation for the price gap results in different loyalty values, just as it did when the parametric approaches were employed. Figure 5 shows that there is not much difference between this model and the one without heterogeneity (Figure 3) for nonloyal consumers. However, the estimates for loyal consumers (Figure 6) changed dramatically. The model illustrated in Figure 6 resembles prospect theory, but it is clear that there is an area (i.e., the zone of indifference) where consumers do not react to price changes.
---------------------------------- Figure 5 about here.
----------------------------------
23

---------------------------------- Figure 6 about here.
----------------------------------
As discussed previously, the nonparametric estimates are used in two ways. First, we want to detect which theory is best represents the underlying data set. Second, if the first step shows assimilation contrast to be the best theory, we additionally use the nonparametric estimates to obtain an optimal  for the width of the zone of indifference. This makes it possible to abandon the restriction of a symmetric indifference zone. Of course, a visually observed range will never be exact, but it can lead to much better estimation results, especially when using a nonsymmetrical indifference zone.
From Figures 5 and 6, it can be determined that for the segment of nonloyal consumers using an internal reference price, the zone of indifference is symmetric interval with a width of 0.14. Loyal consumers using an external reference price have a nonsymmetrical zone, with a width of 0.1 on the gain side and 0.04 on the loss side. With these new values for  we reestimate our model incorporating heterogeneity by separating consumers into loyal and nonloyal.
---------------------------------- Table 7 about here.
----------------------------------Table 7 compares the estimation based on the assimilation contrast theory model with symmetric and, due to the parametric model restriction, "suboptimal"  with the model using the  values extracted from the Figures 5 and 6. Due to a slightly larger zone of indifference in the model with  from the nonparametric estimation, all price-related values change slightly, the
24

largest changes being to the gain and mid components in the external reference price model. Most important is the significant improvement in model fit, which can also be found in the prediction samples.
DISCUSSION When describing consumer behavior in regard to brand choice and price decisions, reference price should be added to the usual multinomial logit model so to incorporate nonrational behavior. Generally, two theories are used to model this behavior: prospect theory and assimilation contrast theory. These theories differ in many ways, but here we concentrated only on the existence or nonexistence of an indifference zone in the utility function related to price. Most reference price studies use models based on prospect theory. In our simulation study we showed that using prospect theory for data sets based on assimilation contrast theory leads to significant parameter estimates, but that these estimates do not include the true values in the approximate confidence interval. In the real data set application, we used a segmentation of two consumer types (loyal and nonloyal). The model estimation was done not only with parametric approaches based on either prospect theory or assimilation contrast theory, but also with a nonparametric approach, where no theory specification is necessary. We found that neglecting consumer heterogeneity could lead to overlapping effects regarding which theory is the "correct." Loyal and nonloyal consumers have different reactions to price promotions. Loyal consumers behave according to assimilation contrast theory and exhibit a nonsymmetrical indifference zone, the detection of which is possible under a nonparametric estimation method. Nonloyal consumers act consistent with prospect theory. For this segment of consumers, we found a very steep part around the zero region of the price gap and less steep areas for loss and gain.
25

Our study makes a significant contribution to the reference price literature by showing what can happen when the "wrong" theory is used to predict consumer behavior, the implications of which we believe have many practical applications. Management, in particular, will be keenly interested in correctly estimating consumers' indifference zones before making important and potentially expensive merchandizing decisions.
26

Psychological theory

Comparison

Type of model Reference price type

Prospect theory

Assimilation contrast theory

Prospect versus assimilation
contrast theory

IRP e.g., Winer (1986)

e.g., Kalyanaram Kalyanaram and and Little (1994) Little (1994)

parametric ERP both
IRP semiparametric
ERP

e.g., Hardie et al. (1993)

×

e.g., Briesch et al. (1997a), Pauwels et al.

Mazumdar and Papatla

(2004)

(2000)

× Abe (1998)

××

× ×
× ×

Table 1: Overview of all possible model type and theory combinations

27

Brand 1

Brand 2

Brand 3

Price

uniform [0.75; 1.00] uniform [0.65; 0.90] uniform [0.60; 0.70]

Promoted price

uniform [0.50; 0.70] uniform [0.40; 0.55] uniform [0.45; 0.55]

Promotional frequency

1 out of 4 weeks

1 out of 4 weeks

1 out of 8 weeks

Feature frequency

1 out of 16 weeks

1 out of 16 weeks

1 out of 36 weeks

Table 2: Variable specification for simulation study

28

Parametric results

True model

Prospect theory

Assimilation contrast theory

Without reference
price

Semiparametric approach

P

-7 -7.42* -7.42* -11.37*

-7.40*

Feat

2 2.16* 2.16* 1.83*

2.14*

Gain Loss

4 4.33* 4.33* -6.5 -6.28* -6.28*

n. a. n. a.

Plot



0 n. a.

0 n. a.

Plot

A

-2263

-2263

-2538

-2262

2

0.495

0.495

0.435

0.495

True parameter value lies with 95% probability in the approximate confidence interval. *Significant.
Table 3: Estimation results for simulated data set based on prospect theory

29

Parametric results

True model

Assimilation contrast theory

Assimilation contrast theory

Prospect theory

Semiparametric approach

P

-7 -7.42* -7.85* -7.60*

-7.26*

Feat

2 2.02* 1.87* 1.83*

2.03*

Gain

4 3.92* 3.21*

2.96*

Mid

0.05 0.52 -0.68 n. a.

Plot

Loss

-6.5 -6.24* -5.98*

-5.30*



0.2 / 0.1

0.2 / 0.1

0.1 / 0.1

n. a.

Plot

A

-2383

-2409

-2434

-2386

2

0.469

0.463

0.458

0.468

True parameter value lies with 95% probability in the approximate confidence interval. *Significant.
Table 4: Estimation results for simulated data set based on assimilation contrast theory

30

Prospect theory

Assimilation contrast theory

IRP ERP IRP ERP

Semiparametric Without

approach

reference

price IRP ERP

P

-2.93*

n. a. -2.38*

n. a. -1.68* n. a. -4.68*

Displ

0.64* 0.62*

0.60*

0.62* 0.58* 0.60* 0.63*

Feat

1.29* 1.29*

1.14*

1.29* 1.11* 1.19* 1.28*

Gain

1.34* 2.76*

1.68*

2.76*

n. a.

Mid

n. a. n. a. -9.09*

n. a. Plot Plot n. a.

Loss -3.29* -6.05* -1.98* -6.05*

n. a.

LOY

5.09* 5.30*

5.09*

5.30* 5.28* 5.31* 5.15*



n. a. n. a.

0.2

0 Plot Plot n. a.

A

-3845 -3836

-3810

-3836 -3794 -3812 -3852

2

0.270 0.272

0.277

0.272 0.279 0.275 0.269

*Significant.
Table 5: Estimation results for real data set without incorporating heterogeneity

31

Prospect theory

Assimilation contrast theory

Semiparametric approach

IRP ERP IRP ERP IRP ERP

P

-3.55*

n. a. -2.04*

n. a. -0.87* n. a.

Displ

0.69* 0.58*

0.67*

0.58* 0.61* 0.57*

Feat

1.27* 1.01*

1.24*

1.06* 1.10* 0.98*

Gain

3.22*

0.20 4.08*

0.05

Mid n. a. n. a. -14.39* -5.22 Plot Plot

Loss -3.99* -7.64* -3.47* -6.75*

LOY

2.55* 7.34*

2.72*

8.41* 2.50* 7.51*

 n. a.

0.1 Plot

A

-3589

-3581

-3545

 2 0.317

0.318

0.324

*Significant.
Table 6: Estimation results for real data set incorporating heterogeneity

32

Assimilation contrast Assimilation contrast theory  suboptimal theory  optimal
IRP ERP IRP ERP

P

-2.04*

n. a. -1.80*

n. a.

Displ

0.67*

0.58*

0.64*

0.60*

Feat

1.24*

1.06*

1.24*

1.03*

Gain

4.08*

0.05 4.34*

0.77

Mid

-14.39*

-5.22 -13.41*

2.61

Loss

-3.47* -6.75*

-1.94 -7.21*

LOY

2.72*

8.41*

2.84*

8.44*

 0.1 0.1 0.14 0.1 / 0.04

A -3581 -3575

 2 0.318

0.319

*Significant.
Table 7: Estimation results for real data set incorporating heterogeneity based on assimilation contrast theory, with parametrically and nonparametrically produced  values

33

Figure 1: Semiparametric and parametric estimation for the price gap in the simulation study with data based on prospect theory
34

Figure 2: Semiparametric and parametric estimation for the price gap in the simulation study with data based on assimilation contrast theory
35

Figure 3: Semiparametric and parametric estimation for the price gap in the real data set for the internal reference price without incorporating heterogeneity
36

Figure 4: Semiparametric and parametric estimation for the price gap in the real data set for the external reference price without incorporating heterogeneity
37

Figure 5: Semiparametric and parametric estimation for the price gap in the real data set for nonloyal consumers incorporating heterogeneity
38

Figure 6: Semiparametric and parametric estimation for the price gap in the real data set for loyal consumers incorporating heterogeneity
39

References Abe, Makoto (1998), "Measuring consumer, nonlinear brand choice response to price," Journal of Retailing, 74(4), 541­68. Abramson, Charles, Rick L. Andrews, and Imran S. Currim (2000), "Parameter bias from unobserved effects in the multinomial logit model of consumer choice," Journal of Marketing Research, 37, 410­26. Biswas, Abhijit, and Edward A. Blair (1991), "Contextual effects of reference price in retail advertisements," Journal of Marketing, 55(3), 1­12. ----, Elizabeth J. Wilson, and Jane W. Licata (1993), "Reference pricing studies in marketing: A synthesis of research results," Journal of Business Research, 27, 239­56. Briesch, Richard A., Pradeep K. Chintagunta, and Rosa L. Matzkin (1997a), "Nonparametric and semiparametric models of brand choice behavior," Discussion paper, University of Texas at Austin. ----, Lakshman Krishnamurthi, Tridib Mazumdar, and S. P. Raj (1997b), "A comparative analysis of reference price models," Journal of Consumer Research, 24, 202­14. Chang, Kwangpil, S. Siddarth, and Charles B. Weinberg (1999), "The impact of heterogeneity in purchase timing and price responsiveness on estimating of sticker shock effects," Marketing Science, 18(2), 178­92. DeSarbo, Wayne S., Asim Ansari, Pradeep Chintagunta, Charles Himmelberg, Kamel Jedidi, Richard Johnson, Wagner Kamakura, Peter Lenk, Kannan Srinivasan, and Michel Wedel (1997), "Representing heterogeneity in consumer response models," Marketing Letters, 8(3), 335­48. ----, Youngchan Kim, and Duncan Fong (1999), "A Bayesian multidimensional scaling
40

procedure for the spatial analysis of revealed choice data," Journal of Econometrics, 89, 79­108. Edwards, Kimberly D. (1996), "Prospect theory: A literature review," International
Review of Financial Analysis, 5(1), 19­38. Emery, Fred (1969), "Some psychological aspects of price," in Pricing Strategy, Bernard
Taylor and Gordon Wills, eds. London: Staples. Erdem, Tülin, Glenn Mayhew, and Baohang Sun (2001), "Understanding reference-price
shoppers: A within- and cross-category analysis," Journal of Marketing Research, 38, 445­57. Estelami, Hooman, Donald R. Lehmann, and Alfred C. Holden (2001) "Macro-economic
determinants of consumer price knowledge: A meta-analysis of four decades of research," International Journal of Research in Marketing, 18, 341­55.
Gijsbrechts, Els (1993), "Prices and pricing research in consumer marketing: Some recent developments," International Journal of Research in Marketing, 10, 115­51.
Guadagni, Peter M., and John D. C. Little (1983), "A logit model of brand choice calibrated on scanner data," Marketing Science, 2(3), 203­38.
Han, Sangman, Sunil Gupta, and Donald R. Lehmann (2001), "Consumer price sensitivity and price thresholds," Journal of Retailing, 77, 435­56.
Hardie, Bruce G. S., Eric J. Johnson, and Peter S. Fader (1993), "Modeling loss aversion and reference dependence effects on brand choice," Marketing Science, 12(4), 378­94.
Hastie, Trevor, and Robert Tibshirani (1990), Generalized Additive Models. London: Chapman & Hall.
Jain, Dipak C., Naufel J. Vilcassim, and Pradeep K. Chintagunta (1994), "A randomcoefficients logit brand-choice model applied to panel data," Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 12(3), 317­28.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky (1979), "Prospect theory: An analysis of decision
41

under risk," Econometrica, 47(2), 263­91. Kalwani, Manohar U., Chi Kin Yim, Heikki J. Rinne, and Yoshi Sugita (1990), "A price
expectations model of customer brand choice," Journal of Marketing Research, 17, 251­62. ----, and ---- (1992), "Consumer price and promotion expectations: An experimental
study," Journal of Marketing Research, 29, 90­100. Kalyanaram, Gurumurthy, and John D. C. Little (1994), "An empirical analysis of latitude
of price acceptance in consumer package goods," Journal of Consumer Research, 21, 408­18. ----, and Russell S. Winer (1995), "Empirical generalization from reference price
research," Marketing Science, 14(3), G161­69. Kamakura, Wagner A., Byung-Do Kim, and Jonathan Lee (1996), "Modeling preference
and structural heterogeneity in consumer choice," Marketing Science, 15(2), 152­72. ----, and Gary J. Russell (1989), "A probabilistic choice model for market segmentation
and elasticity structure," Journal of Marketing Research, 26, 379­90. Kannan, P. K., and Gordon P. Wright (1991), "Modeling and testing structured markets:
A nested logit approach," Marketing Science, 10(1), 58­82. Klein, Noreen M., and Janet E. Oglethorpe (1987), "Cognitive reference points in
consumer decision making," in Advances in Consumer Research, Melanie Wallendorf and Paul Anderson, eds. Provo: UT: Association for Consumer Research.
Krishnamurthi, Lakshman, Tridib Mazumdar, and S. P. Raj (1992), "Asymmetric response to price in consumer brand choice and purchase quantity decisions," Journal of Consumer Research, 19, 387­400.
----, and S. P. Raj (1991), "An empirical analysis of the relationship between brand loyalty and consumer price elasticity," Marketing Science, 10(2), 172­83.
Lichtenstein, Donald R., and William O. Bearden (1989), "Contextual influences on
42

perceptions of merchant-supplied reference prices," Journal of Consumer Research, 16, 55­66. Linton, Oliver B., and Jens Perch Nielsen (1995), "A kernel method of estimating
structured nonparametric regression models," Biometrika, 84(2), 469­73. Mazumdar, Tridib, and Purushottam Papatla (1995), "Loyalty differences in the use of
internal and external reference prices," Marketing Letters, 6(2), 111­22. ----, and ---- (2000), "An investigation of reference price segments," Journal of Marketing
Research, 17, 246­58. Monroe, Kent B. (1971), "Measuring price thresholds by psychophysics and latitudes of
acceptance," Journal of Marketing Research, 8, 460­64. Pauwels, Koen H., Franses, Philip Hans and Srinivasan, Shuba (2004), "Reference-based
Transitions in Short-run Price Elasticity," ERIM Report Series Reference No. ERS-2003-095MKT.
Rajendran, K. N., and Gerard J. Tellis (1994), "Contextual and temporal components of reference price," Journal of Marketing, 58, 22­34.
Raman, Kalyan, and Frank M. Bass (2002), "A general test of reference price theory in the presence of threshold effects," Tijdschrift voor Economie en Management, 47, 205­26.
Sawyer, Alan G., and Peter R. Dickson (1984), "Psychological perspectives on consumer response to sales promotion," in Research on Sales Promotion: Collected Papers, Katherine E. Jocz, ed. Cambridge, MA: Marketing Science Institute.
Sherif, Carolyn. W. (1963), "Social categorization as a function of latitude of acceptance and series range," Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 67(2), 148­56.
Sherif, Muzafer, and Carl I. Hovland (1961), Social Judgment. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Thaler, Richard (1980), "Toward a positive theory of consumer choice," Journal of
43

Economic Behavior and Organization, 1, 39­60. ---- (1985), "Mental accounting and consumer choice," Marketing Science, 4(3), 199­214. Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman (1981), "The framing of decisions and the
psychology of choice," Science, 211, 453­58. Urbany, Joel E., William O. Bearden, and Dan C. Weilbaker (1988), "The effect of
plausible and exaggerated reference prices on consumer perceptions and price research," Journal of Consumer Research, 15, 95­110.
----, and Peter R. Dickson (1990), "Prospect theory and pricing decision," Journal of Behavioral Economics, 19(1), 69­81.
Winer, Russell S. (1985), "A price vector model of demand for consumer durables: Preliminary developments," Marketing Science, 4, 74-90.
---- (1986), "A reference price model of brand choice for frequently purchased products," Journal of Consumer Research, 13, 250­56.
---- (1988), "Behavioral perspective on pricing: Buyers' subjective perceptions of price revisited," in Issues in Pricing, T. M. Devinney, ed. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Wricke, Martin, Andreas Herrmann, and Franz Huber (2000), "Behavioral pricing," WiSt, 12, 692­97.
44

SFB 649 Discussion Paper Series
For a complete list of Discussion Papers published by the SFB 649, please visit http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de.
001 "Nonparametric Risk Management with Generalized Hyperbolic Distributions" by Ying Chen, Wolfgang Härdle and Seok-Oh Jeong, January 2005.
002 "Selecting Comparables for the Valuation of the European Firms" by Ingolf Dittmann and Christian Weiner, February 2005.
003 "Competitive Risk Sharing Contracts with One-sided Commitment" by Dirk Krueger and Harald Uhlig, February 2005.
004 "Value-at-Risk Calculations with Time Varying Copulae" by Enzo Giacomini and Wolfgang Härdle, February 2005.
005 "An Optimal Stopping Problem in a Diffusion-type Model with Delay" by Pavel V. Gapeev and Markus Reiß, February 2005.
006 "Conditional and Dynamic Convex Risk Measures" by Kai Detlefsen and Giacomo Scandolo, February 2005.
007 "Implied Trinomial Trees" by Pavel Cízek and Karel Komorád, February 2005.
008 "Stable Distributions" by Szymon Borak, Wolfgang Härdle and Rafal Weron, February 2005.
009 "Predicting Bankruptcy with Support Vector Machines" by Wolfgang Härdle, Rouslan A. Moro and Dorothea Schäfer, February 2005.
010 "Working with the XQC" by Wolfgang Härdle and Heiko Lehmann, February 2005.
011 "FFT Based Option Pricing" by Szymon Borak, Kai Detlefsen and Wolfgang Härdle, February 2005.
012 "Common Functional Implied Volatility Analysis" by Michal Benko and Wolfgang Härdle, February 2005.
013 "Nonparametric Productivity Analysis" by Wolfgang Härdle and Seok-Oh Jeong, March 2005.
014 "Are Eastern European Countries Catching Up? Time Series Evidence for Czech Republic, Hungary, and Poland" by Ralf Brüggemann and Carsten Trenkler, March 2005.
015 "Robust Estimation of Dimension Reduction Space" by Pavel Cízek and Wolfgang Härdle, March 2005.
016 "Common Functional Component Modelling" by Alois Kneip and Michal Benko, March 2005.
017 "A Two State Model for Noise-induced Resonance in Bistable Systems with Delay" by Markus Fischer and Peter Imkeller, March 2005.
018 "Yxilon ­ a Modular Open-source Statistical Programming Language" by Sigbert Klinke, Uwe Ziegenhagen and Yuval Guri, March 2005.
019 "Arbitrage-free Smoothing of the Implied Volatility Surface" by Matthias R. Fengler, March 2005.
020 "A Dynamic Semiparametric Factor Model for Implied Volatility String Dynamics" by Matthias R. Fengler, Wolfgang Härdle and Enno Mammen, March 2005.
021 "Dynamics of State Price Densities" by Wolfgang Härdle and Zdenk Hlávka, March 2005.
022 "DSFM fitting of Implied Volatility Surfaces" by Szymon Borak, Matthias R. Fengler and Wolfgang Härdle, March 2005.
SFB 649, Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

023 "Towards a Monthly Business Cycle Chronology for the Euro Area" by Emanuel Mönch and Harald Uhlig, April 2005.
024 "Modeling the FIBOR/EURIBOR Swap Term Structure: An Empirical Approach" by Oliver Blaskowitz, Helmut Herwartz and Gonzalo de Cadenas Santiago, April 2005.
025 "Duality Theory for Optimal Investments under Model Uncertainty" by Alexander Schied and Ching-Tang Wu, April 2005.
026 "Projection Pursuit For Exploratory Supervised Classification" by EunKyung Lee, Dianne Cook, Sigbert Klinke and Thomas Lumley, May 2005.
027 "Money Demand and Macroeconomic Stability Revisited" by Andreas Schabert and Christian Stoltenberg, May 2005.
028 "A Market Basket Analysis Conducted with a Multivariate Logit Model" by Yasemin Boztu and Lutz Hildebrandt, May 2005.
029 "Utility Duality under Additional Information: Conditional Measures versus Filtration Enlargements" by Stefan Ankirchner, May 2005.
030 "The Shannon Information of Filtrations and the Additional Logarithmic Utility of Insiders" by Stefan Ankirchner, Steffen Dereich and Peter Imkeller, May 2005.
031 "Does Temporary Agency Work Provide a Stepping Stone to Regular Employment?" by Michael Kvasnicka, May 2005.
032 "Working Time as an Investment? ­ The Effects of Unpaid Overtime on Wages, Promotions and Layoffs" by Silke Anger, June 2005.
033 "Notes on an Endogenous Growth Model with two Capital Stocks II: The Stochastic Case" by Dirk Bethmann, June 2005.
034 "Skill Mismatch in Equilibrium Unemployment" by Ronald Bachmann, June 2005.
035 "Uncovered Interest Rate Parity and the Expectations Hypothesis of the Term Structure: Empirical Results for the U.S. and Europe" by Ralf Brüggemann and Helmut Lütkepohl, April 2005.
036 "Getting Used to Risks: Reference Dependence and Risk Inclusion" by Astrid Matthey, May 2005.
037 "New Evidence on the Puzzles. Results from Agnostic Identification on Monetary Policy and Exchange Rates." by Almuth Scholl and Harald Uhlig, July 2005.
038 "Discretisation of Stochastic Control Problems for Continuous Time Dynamics with Delay" by Markus Fischer and Markus Reiss, August 2005.
039 "What are the Effects of Fiscal Policy Shocks?" by Andrew Mountford and Harald Uhlig, July 2005.
040 "Optimal Sticky Prices under Rational Inattention" by Bartosz Makowiak and Mirko Wiederholt, July 2005.
041 "Fixed-Prize Tournaments versus First-Price Auctions in Innovation Contests" by Anja Schöttner, August 2005.
042 "Bank finance versus bond finance: what explains the differences between US and Europe?" by Fiorella De Fiore and Harald Uhlig, August 2005.
043 "On Local Times of Ranked Continuous Semimartingales; Application to Portfolio Generating Functions" by Raouf Ghomrasni, June 2005.
044 "A Software Framework for Data Based Analysis" by Markus Krätzig, August 2005.
045 "Labour Market Dynamics in Germany: Hirings, Separations, and Job-toJob Transitions over the Business Cycle" by Ronald Bachmann, September 2005.
SFB 649, Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

046 "Paternal Uncertainty and the Economics of Mating, Marriage, and Parental Investment in Children" by Dirk Bethmann and Michael Kvasnicka, September 2005.
047 "Estimation and Testing for Varying Coeffcients in Additive Models with Marginal Integration " by Lijian Yang, Byeong U. Park, Lan Xue and Wolfgang Härdle, September 2005.
048 "Zeitarbeit in Deutschland: Trends und Perspektiven" by Michael C. Burda and Michael Kvasnicka, September 2005.
049 "Courtesy and Idleness: Gender Differences in Team Work and Team Competition" by Radosveta Ivanova-Stenzel and Dorothea Kübler, September 2005.
050 "Do Factor Shares Reflect Technology?" by Benjamin Bental and Domonique Demougin, September 2005.
051 "Optimal investments for risk- and ambiguity-averse preferences: A duality approach" by Alexander Schied, September 2005.
052 "Relational Contracts and Job Design" by Anja Schöttner, September 2005.
053 "Explicit characterization of the super-replication strategy in financial markets with partial transaction costs" by Imen Bentahar and Bruno Bouchard, October 2005.
054 "Aid Effectiveness and Limited Enforceable Conditionality" by Almuth Scholl, August 2005.
055 "Limited Enforceable International Loans, International Risk Sharing and Trade" by Almuth Scholl, August 2005.
056 "Stock Markets and Business Cycle Comovement in Germany before World War I: Evidence from Spectral Analysis" by Albrecht Ritschl and Martin Uebele, November 2005.
057 "An empirical test of theories of price valuation using a semiparametric approach, reference prices, and accounting for heterogeneity" by Yasemin Boztu and Lutz Hildebrandt, November 2005.
SFB 649, Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

