BERLIN

SFB 6 4 9 E C O N O M I C R I S K

SFB 649 Discussion Paper 2006-045
Firm Specific Wage Spread in Germany Decomposition of regional differences in inter firm
wage dispersion
Bernd Görzig* Martin Gornig* Axel Werwatz*
* Deutsches Institut für Wirtschaftsforschung (DIW), Berlin, Germany
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".
http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de ISSN 1860-5664
SFB 649, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin

Firm Specific Wage Spread in Germany -
Decomposition of regional differences in inter firm wage dispersion1 Bernd Görzig, Martin Gornig, Axel Werwatz
All: DIW Berlin, Königin-Luise-Strasse 5, D-14195 Berlin. Bernd Görzig: Tel: 49 30 89789314, e-mail: bgoerzig@diw.de; Martin Gornig: Tel: 49 30 897 89352, e-Mail: mgornig@diw.de; Axel Werwatz: 49 30 89789157, e-mail: awerwatz@diw.de.
1 This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".
1

Firm Specific Wage Spread in Germany -
Decomposition of regional differences in inter firm wage dispersion
Abstract The purpose of this paper is to sort out firm-related differences from effects that result from different economic structures. A non-parametric decomposition is used to analyse firm level difference between the wage spread in the two major regions of unified Germany. If firm-specific effects explain wage dispersion between firms, a decomposition of the wage dispersion between firms is necessary. The decomposition can help to find out, whether the economy-wide results for different regions are due to the composition of the regional economies by industries and firm-size, or whether the differences are due to firm-specific influences, like distinctions in market power. For Germany, a considerable part of the difference in the wage spread between the East and the West can be explained by different economic structures. However, by far the greater part of the difference in the wage spread between firms in the two parts of the country results from lower wages paid by firms of the same type in East Germany compared with their counterparts in West Germany. JEL Classification Numbers: L16, C14, J30 Keywords: Productivity, Wage Differentiation, Wage Spread, Firm Wage Levels, Wage Sharing, Non Parametric Analysis, Decomposition
2

1 Motivation
It is widely accepted in the literature that firm productivity and wage dispersion between firms are inter-related (Lallemand/Plasman/Rycx, 2005). However, different explanations exist for the direction of causality between these two variables. While some authors assume that firms pay higher wages to motivate workers and to improve their productivity ("efficiency wages"), others argue that higher wages might be the result of higher profits of successful firms ("rent-sharing"). Micro-data analyses can be helpful to understand to what extent a differing degree of unobservable heterogeneity of labour may explain productivity differences between regions. In particular, the productivity of two workers with the same observable individual characteristics may differ because they are employed by different firms. Some of these firm-related differences may again be attributed to observable firmcharacteristics such as industry or firm-size. However, there may remain a purely firm-specific "fixed-effect" on productivity. The purpose of this paper is to sort out these firm-related differences. If firm-specific effects explain wage dispersion between firms, a decomposition of the wage dispersion between firms is necessary. The decomposition might help to find out, whether the economy-wide results for the different regions are due to the composition of the regional economies by industries and firm-size, or whether the differences are due to firm-specific influences. In particular, we decompose the wage dispersion between firms into "structural components" related to the composition of firm-types (identified by sectoral affiliation and firm-size) and purely firm-specific influences. This decomposition is carried out for two seemingly distinct major German regions, East- and West Germany. If extended to other countries the decomposition might also help to find out, whether the economy-wide results for different countries are due to the composition of the national economies by industries and firm-size, or whether the differences are due to firmspecific influences. Particularly, for the comparison of the wage dispersion between the several regions, such a decomposition will enhance the knowledge on the influence of wage dispersion on productivity performance of the regions.
2 EU KLEMS, Productivity in the European Union: A Comparative Industry Approach, EU Sixth Framework Programme.
3

In the major market economies, a process of increasing wage differentiation started before 1990, although to very differing degrees. Whereas relatively marked wage differentials had always been evident in the United States, in some European countries, particularly Germany, differences in wage levels remained relatively small (Christensen/Schimmelpfennig, 1998).3 Meanwhile, the transition economies of Central and Eastern Europe experienced major changes in wage distributions as workers' wages started to vary significantly with enterprise performance (Basu/Estrin/Svejnar, 2004). In view of these tendencies it might be expected that after reunification East Germany would - parallel to the strong rise in wages that was evident - have experienced a rapid differentiation in wage levels. Starting from a very flat wage structure among both workers and firms (Gornig/Schwarze, 1990; Stephan/Wiedemann, 1990), empirical results indicate that the dispersion of wages among East German workers indeed increased significantly (Franz/Steiner, 1999). Yet, there is little knowledge of how wage differences between firms in East Germany have developed. However, firm data from the statistics on persons employed paying statutory social insurance contributions4 does indicate that wage differences between firms in East Germany have increased markedly (table 1). In 2001, the variance was a good 50 % above the 1994 level, so the tendency to greater wage differentiation between firms in East Germany was growing at the end of the 1990s. The average annual rate of change in this variance rose from 5.3 % in the period 1994 to 1998 to 6.9 % between 1998 and 2001, while the growth in the wage level diminished at the same time. The relative variability, measured by the variation coefficient of the wage level between firms, also increased strongly.
3 As globalisation progressed, economists argued that greater wage differentiation was needed in Germany, too. The call for adequate wage differentiation runs through several reports of Germany's Council of Economic Experts (the `Sachverständigenrat' (SVR) - SVR`94, Items 447ff., SVR`99, Item 341). The main emphasis is on differentiation to reflect skills levels (SVR`00, Items 416f.), but with the persistently high level of unemployment, the demands for wage differentiation between firms also grew (Siebert, 1998, SVR'04, Items 704ff.). This is reflected i.a. in the growing number of wage agreements for individual firms and the number of opt-out clauses in the collective agreements for companies in financial difficulties, and in the declining number of companies that are bound by the national collective agreements (Ellgut/Kohaut, 2004). 4 On the data base see also the remarks in Section 4.
4

Table 1 Wage Differences between Establishments in East Germany, 1994 to 2001

Jahr

1994

1998

2001

Variance in establishment wage levels
Memo item: Coefficient of variation Average wage level for establishments

In euro²
In % In euro

Annual average change from previous period in %

284,2
41,0 41,2

349,9
41,8 44,8

427,2
45,2 45,8

Variance in establishment wage levels
Memo item: Coefficient of variation Average wage level for establishments

5,3 6,9
0,5 2,7 2,1 0,7

a Wage level measured as the average day's wage per person employed in the establishment. Source: Federal Labour Agency, Annual reports for employment statistics.

However, how the degree of wage differentiation between firms in East Germany now reached is to be assessed cannot be deduced from its development alone. It remains an open question whether East Germany has already fully exploited the potential for wage differentiation between firms under market economy conditions, or whether, with fewer firms bound by the collective wage agreements and greater possibilities for making use of opt-out clauses, greater wage differentiation has actually formed there.
In order to classify and assess the degree of wage differentiation between firms now reached in East Germany this paper shows and analyses the differences in the wage differentiation between firms in East and West Germany. For this, first the current state of empirical research into possible explanations of the differences in wages paid by firms will be outlined. In order to quantify the influence of the main determinants of firm wage levels as given in the literature firms of the same size and in the same sector will be compared, using a non-parametric decomposition estimate. So far, this has been used mainly to explain differences in wage levels between men and women, for instance (Nopo, 2004) or between regions (Görzig/Gornig/Werwatz,

5

2004). Here the approach is widened and applied to an analysis of the East-West comparison of wage levels in firms.
2 Determinants of Firm Wage Levels
The theoretical justification of the demand for greater wage differentiation is the consideration that wages that are not geared to the marginal product cause disequilibria on the labour market and are thus one of the causes of the persistent level of unemployment. In the perfect competition model, equilibrium can only be achieved if the differences in workers' contributions to output corresponding to their skill levels are taken into account in different wage levels. However, in the empirical examination of wage differences between firms doubts have repeatedly arisen (Krueger/Summers, 1988) whether wage differences between firms can be explained exclusively by the heterogeneity of the labour input, even if differences in quality that are not observed are taken into account beside those that are observed. Rather, it has been suggested that a large part of the wage differences that can be observed are due to firm heterogeneity (Gibbons/Katz, 1991; Dickens/Katz, 1987). The relatively great importance of firm factors for differences in wage levels is also confirmed by a large number of more recent studies based on comprehensive employer-employee data sets (Abowd/Kramarz/Margolis, 1999; WinterEbmer/Zweimüller, 1999; Goux/Maurin, 1999). The extent to which firm factors are seen as the explanation depends on the method used, but it also depends on the type and size of the control variables used and on the region under examination. Abowd/Kramarz (2000) used an employer-employee data set to study the US federal state of Washington, and concluded that about 50 percent of the observable wage differences were due to firm factors. The firm determinants that can be shown to have an outstanding influence on the wage level even when a large number of other factors are also taken into account generally include the economic sector and the size of the firm. That also applies to East and West Germany, although not right across the board (Bellmann/Kohaut, 1999). Sector-specific wage differences are remarkably persistent over time and the structures are similar by international comparison (Krueger/Summers, 1988). The latter is
6

also confirmed by a more recent comparison of wage structures in France with those in the US federal state of Washington (Abowd/Kramarz, 2000). However, clear differences are evident concerning regulated economic sectors in France. Studies of the new market economies in Eastern Europe (Grundig/Pohl, 2003) have also been able to establish remarkably similar sectoral wage structures there. There are many theoretical explanations of the influence the company's economic sector exerts on its employees' wage level. Firstly, institutional conditions on the input side are named, like trade union ties or the presence of a works council (Hübler/Jirjahn, 2004). On the other hand, if the data set permits, output side factors are frequently also stressed, like the influence of competition (Nickell/Vainiomaki/Wadhwani, 1994) and market power on product markets (Blanchflower/Machin, 1996; Jirjahn/Klodt, 1999). The influence of the firm's size on its wage level seems to be very stable by international comparison, and it is robust when numerous other explanatory variables in traditional wage equations are taken into account. Moreover, the relation appears to have strengthened (Gerlach/Hübler, 1995). As an explanation of the influence of the firm's size on firm wage differentials, in addition to the influence of employee organisations, which changes with the size of the firm, the different degrees of complementarity of the production factors used and the monitoring expenditure, which also changes with the size of the firm, are named (Troske, 1999). Technological factors, employees' preferences, and working conditions also play a part (Idson/Oi, 1999). Other explanations can be monopsonistic (single buyer) conditions and implicit rent sharing for employees (Green/Machin/Manning, 1996). Brown and Medoff (1989) concluded that 50 percent of the differences in firm size-specific wage differentials were due to personal factors, and in a more recent longitudinal analysis, based on an employer-employee data set for France, Abowd/Kramarz (2000) reached the conclusion that 70 percent of the size-specific wage differences in the "raw" data is due to firm-specific features. Now that it has been shown, mainly using micro-data sets, that an important part of the observable wage differences is due to firm features, many economists have accepted the conclusion drawn by Blanchflower/Oswald/Sanfey (1996) that the assumption of perfect competition on the companies' factor markets, and above all on their product markets, is not appropriate to explain wage differences. Hence, model
7

approaches based on imperfect competition are becoming increasingly prominent in explaining wages (Abowd/Kramarz/Lengermann/Roux, 2005; Sørensen, 2001).
Increasing attention is also being devoted to the question of implicit rent sharing for employees (Blanchflower/Oswald/Sanfey, 1996; Hildreth/Oswald, 1997). Sørensen (2001) distinguishes between three factors that can affect wage differences between firms. These are differences
· in the marginal product of employees, · in the employees' bargaining power, and · in the companies' market power on their sales markets.
Perfect competition on all markets can only be assumed if exclusively the first of these factors is present. On imperfect labour markets (second, above), the influence of trade unions must also be taken into account or that of other factors that give the employees a bargaining position vis-à-vis their employer (Stephan/Gerlach, 2004). Depending on the size of the firm that can affect individual firms, but it frequently affects whole sectors, too. The case of imperfect product markets (third, above) affects individual firms much more strongly. In assessing rent sharing, it is important to understand that in many cases the employees' bargaining power may possibly depend on the company's market power on its sales markets. If companies are successful on their sales markets owing to their specific market power, irrespective of their size and the sector to which they belong, that can also strengthen the in-house bargaining position of their employees. Using a data set for France, Fakfakh/FitzRoy (2002) were able to show a rentsharing effect, after taking into account numerous control variables. Margolis/Salvanes (2001) reach a similar conclusion for France and Norway. Lundin/Yun (2003) have shown for Sweden that the wage level is above average particularly in those firms that are not exposed to intensive competition from imports. Martins (2004) also confirms for Portugal that the rent-sharing hypothesis is significant in explaining wage differences, and that it is robust against other approaches.
Using extensive micro-data for companies, Basu/Estrin/Svejnar (2004) show for the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Poland and Hungary that a major part of the increased wage differentiation after the transition to the market economy can be explained by the implicit sharing of profits - and losses - with employees in this transition phase.
8

Abowd/Kramarz/Lengermann/Roux (2005) have calculated a quasi rent for individual employees of firms from the difference between wages and their opportunity costs. They conclude that by far the greater part of this depends on firm factors. A large number of empirical studies have shown that the size of the firm and the sector-specific nature of its sales market are crucial factors influencing firm wage differences. Nevertheless, a number of studies have now clearly shown that beyond these characteristic features of a firm that can be objectively measured, there are wage differences that are evidently closely connected to the firm's success on sales markets. The studies by Abowd/Kramarz/Lengermann/Roux (2005) have shown i.a. that the influence of firm factors on the wage differences between firms is considerable in some cases, within individual sectors as well. Therefore, if the observable firm wage differences are controlled by the influence of the industry and the size of the firm, the rent-sharing hypothesis, which has now been confirmed by many studies, suggests that the remaining wage differences greatly depend on in how far the individual firms succeed in achieving above-average profits through their market power on their sales markets. In that case they will also be in a position to pay their employees above-average wages.
3 Methodology
There is ample empirical evidence for pronounced wage differentials across firms and establishments. These differentials usually can be explained -at least to some extent- by observable establishment characteristics such as size or sectoral affiliation. In the present case, we use these observable characteristics to decompose the difference between East Germany's wage variability across plants and West Germany's wage variability across plants. In particular, we ask whether West-East differences in wage variability can be attributed to observable differences in the composition of plants or rather by differences in wage variability of establishment types that can be found in both parts of the country. Put differently, are West-East differences in wage variability due to the fact that certain plant types (such as large industrial plants) are exclusively or overwhelmingly found in only one part of the country? Or should they be "blamed" on West-East differences in the wage variability between plants of a given, comparable type?
9

To compare East Germany's wage variability across plants with that of West Germany and to relate it to observable plant characteristics, we basically employ an analysis of variance approach. That is, we use the well-known result that the raw or marginal variance is the sum of the variance of the conditional means and the mean of the conditional variance. In the present setting, we express, for each part of the country, the unconditional variance of plant-level wages as the sum of two sources of conditional variation: the variation of plant-type specific average wages around the unconditional average and the mean of the plant-type specific variances. In the empirical part, plant types are defined as a combination of plant size (one out of 10 possible categories) and sectoral affiliation (one out of 54 possible categories) and are denoted by x. Using East-Germany to illustrate the notation, we have

Var [Y | E] = {E[Y | x,E] - E[Y | E]}2 f E (x) + Var [Y | x,E]f E (x)

xE xE

= V1a4rX|4E 4{E2[Y4|4x,4E3]} + E1X4|E {4V4a2r [Y4|4x,4E3]}

(A-East) Variance of the type specific means

(B-East) Mean of type specific variances

where f E (x) is the population fraction of establishment type x in the East.5

The equivalent expression for the West is:

Var [Y | W ] =  {E[Y | x,W ] - E[Y | W ]}2 f W (x) +

 Var [Y | x,W ]f W (x)

xW

xW

= V1a4rX4|W {4E2[Y4| 4x,4W3]} + E1X4|W 4{V4ar2[Y4|4x,4W3]}

(A-West) Variance of the type specific means

(B-West) Means of the type specific variances

These analysis-of-variance expressions form the basis for analysing the difference between plant specific wage variability in the West and the East. They imply that the difference of the marginal variances6, Var[Y | W ] -Var[Y | E] , may stem from West-East

differences either in the "(A)"-terms or the "(B)"-terms:

5 The subscript x  E indicates that the summation runs over all elements x belonging to the set E of
establishment types found in the East. VarX|E [·] and EX|E [·] denote the variance and expectation of
the respective argument with regard to the distribution of establishment types in the East (i.e. the distribution of X, given East). 6 Formally, the difference of the region-specific variances could be defined by reversing the order, i.e. by considering Var [Y | E ] - Var [Y | W ] . However, the particular order "West minus East" is suggested by the aim of the present paper: studying the adjustment of Eastern wage variability towards the reference level provided by the West.
10

Var [Y | W ] -Var [Y | E] = V1a4rX4|W {4E2[Y4|4x,4W3]} -V1a4rX4|E 4{E2[Y4|4x,4E3]}
1444(A4-W4est)444424444(A-E4as4t) 4443
Difference of the variances of the conditional means

- E1X4|W 4{V4ar2[Y4|4x,4W3]} - E1X4|O {4V4a2r [Y4|4x,4E3]}
1444(4B-W4est4) 44424444(B-4Eas4t) 4443
Difference of the Means of the conditional variances

The expressions (A-West) and (A-East) represent the variation of the type-specific average wages around the respective region-specific unconditional mean. They do not directly reflect wage variation between establishments but rather between establishment types. Their difference,  Mean , therefore primarily reflects "structural" WestEast differences, i.e. differences in the composition and structure of establishment types. The expressions (B-West) und (B-East) however contain for any given type the variance of wages across establishments. They are the focal point of this analysis, as they may help to assess the extent to which West-East differences in wage variation can be attributed to West-East differences between establishments of a given, comparable type.

However, West-East differences in the ,,(B)"-terms may not only be caused by differing type-specific wage variances but also be due to more "structural" causes. This is evident from the definition of these terms which, in the case of East Germany, has the following form:

(B-East): EX|E {Var [Y | x,E]} = V1a4r4[Y2|4x,43E] f{E (x)

{xE

(iii )

(ii )

(i )

This definition involves (i) the support of the distribution of establishment types, (ii) the share of each type among all establishments in the region and (iii) the typespecific variances. West-East differences in the average type-specific variances can thus arise from three components

(i) establishment types existing in only one part of the country (Special Component),
(ii) establishment types existing in both parts of the country, but with unequal relative frequencies (Type-Structure Component)
(iii) establishment types existing in both parts of the country, but with (strongly) differing type-specific variances (Regional Component).

11

To capture these three sources of differences between EX|W [Var(Y | x,W )] and
EX|E Var (Y | x,E) , we apply the following decomposition introduced in Nopo's (2002) extension of the well-known work by Blinder (1973) and Oxaca (1973):

EX|W [Var (Y | x,W )] - EX|E [Var (Y | x,E )]

= 1W44est2+ 4E43ast +

{Typ

+

{Reg

(i) Special components (ii) Different weights of

(iii) West-East differences in the variances

comparable types of firms

for comparable types of firms

For reasons of clarity and legibility, the detailed formal definition of each of these terms is given in part 1 of the appendix.

 West and  East represent the components of West-East differences in plant-level wage variation due to the fact that certain plant types are found either exclusively in the West or exclusively in the East. If these ,,exclusive" establishment types are numerous and furthermore exhibit particularly high or particularly low wage variability then they may account for a considerable part of the difference between
[EX|W Var (Y | x,W )] and EX|E Var (Y | x,E ) .

 Typ represents the component of [EX|W Var (Y | x,W )] - EX|E Var (Y | x,E ) attributable to
West-East differences in the distribution of establishment types common to both parts of the country. It accounts for the possibility that the average type-specific variances may differ between Western Germany and Eastern Germany due to differences in the type's relative weights even if all individual type-specific variances were exactly equal in the West and the East.

Finally,  Reg represents the component of the West-East difference in plant-level wage variability due to unequal variances among Western and Eastern establishments of a given, comparable type.  Reg may thus be interpreted as the ,,pure" WestEast difference in wage variability, as it is the only component solely based on the West-East-comparison of variances among establishments belonging to the same size class and the same sector. If the variance of plant-level wages is, for instance, considerably higher among Western plants of a given size and a given sector than among their Eastern counterparts then this can ­in the light of the discussion of section 2 above- be interpreted as evidence for a greater dispersion of market power, profits and rent-sharing among Western establishments. The components , West  East and , Typ however, rather reflect ,,structural" differences between the Western and

12

the Eastern part of the economy as they attribute differences in wage variability to differences in the type and (relative) number of establishments in the two parts of the country. Recalling the ,,structural" interpretation attached above to the difference between the
variance of type-specific average wages (VarX|W {E[Y | x,W ]} - VarX|W {E[Y | x,W ]} ), we
arrive at the following comprehensive representation of the potential sources of differences between the variances of plant-level wages in Western and Eastern Germany:
Var [Y | W ] -Var [Y | E] =

=

Difference of the variances of the conditional means

+

Difference of the means of the conditional variances

= 1V4arX4|W4{E4[Y4|4x,4W4]}2-V4a4rX4|E {4E4[Y4| 4x,E44]3} + E1X4|W 4[V4ar4(Y4| 4x,W444)]2- E4X4|E 4[Va4r4(Y4| x4,E44)3]

Mean

West + East + Typ + Reg

= 1444M4ea4n 4444444442+4444W4e4st4+4E4a4st4+4T44y3p + Reg Economic structure components

In the empirical part of the paper the conditional mean functions E[Y | x,W ] and

E[Y | x,E] and the conditional variance functions Var [Y | x,W ] and Var (Y | x,E) will be

estimated nonparametrically by computing ­in both Western and Eastern Germanythe type-specific mean and variance for each establishment type x separately. That is, for neither the mean nor the variance any parametric functional form is imposed on its relation to establishment type (measured by a plant's size and a plant's sector).

4 The Data
For the purposes of this examination, it is necessary to separate the various structural economic factors that influence the wage differences measured between firms from those that exclusively influence firms of the same type. That depends decisively on how exactly the difference in the composition of the firm types by branch and size of firm in East and West Germany can be evaluated. It is difficult to find data that is suitable for the purposes of decomposition that it provides representative information on the level of wages in firms, their branch and size, and is compatible for East and West Germany. Sources frequently used for East-

13

West comparisons, like the ZEW Innovation Panel (Rammer et al., 2003) or the IAB Business Panel (Bellmann, 2002) do differentiate according to these criteria, but owing to the small number of cases covered, they are inadequate for regional comparisons using a non-parametric approach. However, information on the wage level in individual establishments, their branch and size, and that covers a high number of cases, can be obtained from the annual reports for the employment statistics compiled by the Federal Labour Agency (BA). These statistics are primarily intended to provide information on employees that is relevant for social insurance purposes. Every establishment that employs at least one person paying statutory social insurance contributions is given a number, and these numbers enable the information on the employees to be converted into information on the establishments. Moreover, the establishments in the database so created can also be assigned geographically to East or West Germany through the regional classification of the place of work. The annual reports for 2001, for example, give information on about 2.4 million establishments with just under 37 million jobs. That is nearly a total coverage, with only the establishments without any employees paying social insurance contributions not included. However, a number of problems and distortions also arise in using these employment statistics (Fritsch/König/Weisshuhn, 1992). Owing to the statutory requirements for social insurance, a number of persons and establishments are left out. Moreover, the high wage segment is less differentiated, owing to the upper limit for assessment of statutory social insurance contributions. However, these limitations are very much less distorting in the consideration of average wages in establishments here than they are in analyses of individual wage levels. In addition, analyses of establishment wage levels in East Germany benefit in that the above shortcomings in the compilation have not fundamentally changed in the period under review. On a comparison of the variations in the levels of wages in establishments between East and West Germany it must, however, be borne in mind particularly that the upper limit for assessment in East Germany was about 16 % below that in the West in 2001. So indirectly, the variability of the average wages in companies measured is also limited. But since at the same time more than 90 % of the employees paying statutory social insurance
14

contributions were paid wages below this upper limit, the results on establishment level should be sufficiently informative despite this distortion. The data for 1994, 1998, and 2001 has been evaluated. The level of wages in establishments is shown as the wage per day per person employed. This has been calculated by dividing the wage by the number of calendar days in the period for which the wage was paid. Differences in the average working time per day in the establishment were not taken into account. The branches the establishments belong to are classified into 54 sectors, according to the sectoral classification used by the Federal Labour Agency (Annex 1). The companies are divided into 10 size classes, and this goes slightly beyond the division usual in the statistics on the producing sector (Annex 2). The combination gives 540 cells with correspondingly different types of establishment, to which the establishments and their wage payments in East and West Germany can be assigned.
5 The Results
In order to enable an initial estimate to be made of the relative importance of wage differences between establishments in East Germany, core density estimates7 were made of the distribution of the wages per day paid by the establishments in East and West Germany for 2001. These are compared in Figure 1. The level of wages in East German establishments quite evidently shows a distribution much more closely around the median than that in West German establishments. The share of establishments in East Germany is much higher in the medium wage segment, while the West German establishments are relatively more strongly represented in the clearly lower and higher wage segments.
7 The margins of 1.6 in the West and 1.3 in the East were determined with the modification of "Silverman's rule of thumb" proposed in Härdle (2001).
15

Figure 1: Core Density Estimate of the Distribution of Establishment Wages in East and West Germany
Density .025
.020

.015
West Germany
East Germany .010

.005

.000 0

50 100 Average Daily Wage per Employee in 

150

The evidently lower degree of wage differences between establishments in East Germany can be quantified through a comparison of the variance in wages paid by establishments in the two parts of Germany. In 2001, the variance in the wage level in East German establishments was 427. In West Germany, it reached an amount of 828 in the same year. Measured by the variance, therefore, the differentiation in wages paid by establishments in East Germany is only about half as great as that in West Germany (table 2). In a comparative analysis of the wage differences between establishments in the two parts of the country, however, it must also be borne in mind that the

16

level of wages is lower in East Germany.8 However, the relative variability of the establishment wage level, expressed through the coefficient of variation, also indicates a clearly lower wage differentiation between establishments in East Germany.
Table 2: Wage Differences between Establishments in East and West Germany in 2001

East Germany

West Germany

Difference East in % of
West

Variance in establishment wage levels

In euro²

427,2

828,4

51,6

Memo item: Coefficient of variation Average wage level for establishments

In % In euro

45,2 45,8

55,5 51,9

81,4 88,2

a Wage level measured as the average day's wage per person employed in the establishment. Source: Federal Labour Agency, Annual reports for employment statistics.

How is the undoubtedly much smaller wage differentiation in East Germany than in West Germany to be explained? Bearing in mind the considerations on the determinants of establishment wage levels, one explanation could be the influence of different economic structures in East and West Germany.
If differences in the composition of the economy by branches and size of establishments play a part, an explanation of the smaller differentiation in wages between establishments could be the differences in wage agreements with trade unions.
But, if there are clear deviations in wage differentiation between East and West Germany for establishments of comparable size and branch as well, this rather points to different forms of rent sharing. This would give greater weight to explanations that see the wage differences between establishments as due to differences in the companies' earnings situations and market power.

8 The wage gap between East and West Germany is measured here on average for firms and is noticeably lower than if it were calculated on the basis of the averages for the number employed (Görzig/Gornig/Werwatz, 2004). The deviation in the average figures should mainly be due to the fact that the wage differences between East and West Germany are particularly marked in big firms.
17

To determine the quantitative importance of economic structures for the differences in the variance of establishment wage levels between West and East Germany the amount of the raw difference in the variance of East and West Germany of 401 has been analysed in accordance with the non-parametric decomposition approach shown (cf. table 3).
Table 3:
Components of the Wage Differentiation between Establishments in East and West Germany in 2001

Difference between West Germany and East Germany Euro

Variance total

Variance of conditional
means

Means of conditional variances

Special component

West

East

Type structure component Regional component

Economic structure components

401,2

125,0

-0,1 0,0

28,1 248,2

Components of the difference
in %

100,0 31,2 0,0 0,0 7,0 61,9

Source: Federal Labour Agency, Annual reports for employment statistics.

In the first step, that part of the raw difference in the variance of both parts of Germany was established that results from the variance of the means of the wage level of all 540 sector- and size-specific types of establishment. This component was 125 larger in West Germany in 2001 than in East Germany. So simply differences in the wage spread between each type of establishment in West and East Germany explain 31 % of the total raw difference between the total variances of establishment wage levels. The differences in wages paid by establishments of different size and in different branches are clearly much greater in West Germany than in East Germany.
In addition, differences between the two parts of Germany in the composition of establishments by sector and size, with their typical wage patterns, can also affect the difference in the sum of the variances for each type of establishment. Clearly of minor relevance is the fact that certain types of establishment are only represented in East or West Germany. The special components East and West show values of nearly zero. The negative value for the special component West should be inter-

18

preted as that the types of establishment that only occur in West Germany show a wage differentiation that is even lower than the average in East Germany. Structural economic factors provide a greater explanation of the raw difference in the variances in establishment wage levels. That is principally because each type of establishment in both parts of Germany is represented, but the relative number of establishments of each type differs in West and East. This influence is expressed in the type structure component, which amounted to 28 in 2001. That means that 7 % of the raw difference in the variances in establishment wage levels was due to the fact that of the 540 types of establishment considered, those with particularly high internal inter-establishment wage differentiation played a larger part in West Germany than in East Germany. Altogether, however, even then only just under 40 % of the smaller wage differentiation between establishments in East Germany, measured by the variance, can be shown to be due to structural differences from West Germany. The greater part of the raw difference in the variances in establishment wage levels between West and East Germany is due to the fact that companies of the same branch and size in East Germany show much lower wage deviations than those in West Germany. The regional component, which reflects the deviations in the variance in the same types reached 248 in 2001 and so explains more than 60 % of the raw difference in the variances in establishment wage levels. The results of the decomposition of wage differences between establishments shown here agree with the latest empirical results on the determinants of establishment wage levels reached in other countries as well (Martins, 2004; Basu/Estrin/Svejnar, 2004; Abowd/Kramarz/Lengermann/Roux, 2005). The branch the establishment belongs to and its size largely determine the level of the wages it pays, since as proxy variables they reflect the influence of the use of different production technologies and different institutional conditions on the labour market. But great differences in the wages paid by establishments within the same branch and size class still remain, and these type-specific wage differences can chiefly be regarded as the expression of the different market power of the establishments on their sales markets.
19

6 Conclusion
Wage differentiation between establishments in East Germany increased noticeably in the 1990s. Nevertheless, the variance in establishment wage levels is still much lower than in West Germany. If East Germany's wage level and employment level were to be improved, at least against the West, further differentiation in the wages paid by different establishments would appear to be necessary. There is, however, need for adjustment in inter-firm wage differentiation in two directions.
Part of the adjustment needed is in the low wage segment. The share of establishments in East Germany that pay only under-average wages is much lower than in West Germany. But measures that tackle the institutional conditions on the labour market do not appear to be very promising to achieve an increase in the share of low-wage establishments in East Germany. Deviations from the collectively agreed rates downward are already possible to a much greater extent in East Germany than in West Germany, owing to the generally lower number of establishments bound by the collective agreements and the greater number of opt-out clauses. It must be asked whether the causes of the lack of low-wage establishments in East Germany are not of a different kind. One reason could be the after-effects of the planned economy in the GDR, where wage structures were very homogeneous. In other words, the lesser degree of differentiation is still the expression of economic structures that are changing only slowly in the transition process. Another possible reason could be the connection between the distribution of income and regional demand, for example the demand for simple services. This argument is also used to explain employment gaps between Europe and the United States (Stille/Preissl/Schupp, 2003).
One part of the adjustment needed in wage differentiation in East Germany - and presumably the greater part - is an increase in the share of firms that pay considerably above the average. The importance of these firms for the total wage spread is much greater in West Germany than in East Germany. The results of the decomposition of wage variances have clearly shown that East Germany's shortage here is not primarily the expression of notably different economic structures. Rather, the position of many West German firms in competition on sales markets seems to be so strong, even within the same branch and the same size category, that they can pay wages above the average for firms of their size.
20

A strategy of greater inter-firm wage differentiation in East Germany would therefore
probably only be successful concerning the objectives of employment and income if
the competitive situation for firms can be improved across a broad front. Economic
policy can support such a process, for instance by promoting innovation in East Ger-
many across a similarly broad front.
Literature
Abowd, John and Francis Kramarz (2000), `Inter-industry and Firm-size Wage Differentials: New Evidence from Linked Employer-Employee Data', Cornell University Working Paper.
Abowd, John, Francis Kramarz and D. Margolis (1999). `High wage workers and high wage firms', Econometrica, 67, 2, pp. 251-333.
Abowd, John, Francis Kramarz, Paul Lengermann and Sébastien Roux (2005), `Persistent Inter-Industry Wage Differences: Rent Sharing and Opportunity Costs', Seminar Paper presented at SFU.
Basu, Swati, Saul Estrin and Jan Svejnar (2004), `Wage Determination under Communism and in Transition: Evidence from Central Europe', IZA DP, 1276.
Bellmann, Lutz (2002). `Das IAB-Betriebspanel, Konzeption und Anwendungsbereiche', Allgemeines statistisches Archiv, 86, 2, pp. 177-188.
Bellmann, Lutz and Susanne Kohaut (1999). `Betriebliche Lohnbestimmung in ost- und westdeutschen Betrieben - Eine Analyse mit Daten des IAB-Betriebspanels', Lutz Bellmann, Susanne Kohaut and Manfred Lahner (Eds), Zur Entwicklung von Lohn und Beschäftigung auf der Basis von Betriebs- und Unternehmensdaten, Beiträge zur Arbeitsmarkt und Berufsforschung, 220, S. 9-25.
Blanchflower, David and Stephen Machin (1996), `Product Market Competition, Wages and Productivity: International Evidence from Establishment-Level Data, CEP Discussion Papers.
Blanchflower, David, Andrew Oswald and Peter Sanfey (1996). `Wages, Profits and RentSharing', Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, pp. 227-251.
Blinder, Alan (1973). `Wage Discrimination: Reduced Form and Structural Estimates', The Journal of Human Resources, VII, 4, pp. 436-455.
Brown, Charles and James Medoff (1989). `The Employer Size-Wage Effect', Journal of Political Economy, 97, pp. 1027-1059.
Christensen, Bjoern and Axel Schimmelpfennig (1998). `Arbeitslosigkeit, Qualifikation und Lohnstruktur in Westdeutschland', Die Weltwirtschaft, 2, S. 181.
Dickens, William, and Lawrence Katz (1987), `Inter Industry Wage Differences and Theories of Wage Determination", NBER Working Paper, w2271.
Fakfakh, Fathi and Felix FitzRoy (2002), `Basic wages and firm characteristics: Rent-sharing in French Manufacturing', University of St Andrews, Discussion Paper, 203.
Franz, Wolfgang and Victor Steiner (2000). `Wages in the East German Transition Process Facts and Explanations', German Economic Review, 1, 3, S. 241-269
Franz, Wolfgang and Viktor Steiner (1999), `Löhne im Wiedervereinigungsprozess', ZEW news, 11, Mannheim.
Fritsch, Michael, Andreas König and Gernot Weißhuhn (1992), `Probleme und Vorgehensweisen bei der Bereinigung der in eine Betriebsdatei transformierten Beschäftigtenstatistik', mimeo, Berlin.
21

Gerlach, Knut and Olaf Hübler (1995). `Betriebsgröße und Einkommen. Erklärungen, Entwicklungstendenzen und Mobilitätseinflüsse', Viktor Steiner, Lutz Bellmann, (Eds), Mikroökonomik des Arbeitsmarktes, Beiträge zur Arbeitsmarkt und Berufsforschung, 192, S. 225-264.
Gibbons, Robert and Lawrence Katz (1992). `Does Unmeasured Ability Explain Inter-Industry Wage Differentials?', Review of Economic Studies, 59, pp. 515-535.
Gornig, Martin and J. Schwarze (1990). `DDR: Hohe pauschale Lohnforderungen gefährden die Wettbewerbsfähigkeit', Autoren: DIW-Wochenbericht, 57, S. 441-450.
Görzig, Bernd, Martin Gornig and Axel Werwatz (2004), `East Germany's Wage Gap: A nonparametric decomposition based on establishment characteristics', DIW Discussion Paper, 451.
Görzig, Bernd, Martin Gornig and Axel Werwatz (2004). `Ostdeutschland: Strukturelle Niedriglohnregion?', DIW-Wochenbericht, 44, S. 685-699.
Goux, Dominique and Eric Maurin (1999). `Persistence of Inter-Industry Wage Differentials: A Reexamination on Matched Worker-Firm Panel Data', Journal of Labor Economics, 17, pp. 492-533.
Green, Francis, Stephen Machin and Alan Manning (1996). `The Employer Size-Wage Effect: Can Dynamic Monopsony provide an Explanation?', Oxford Economic Papers, 48, pp. 433-455.
Grundig, Beate, and Carsten Pohl (2003). `Interindustrielle Lohndifferenzierung in Zentraleuropa', ifo-Schnelldienst, 24.
Härdle, Wolfgang (1991). `Smoothing Techniques, With Implementations in S', Springer, New York.
Hildreth, Andrew and Andrew Oswald (1997). `Rent Sharing and Wages: Evidence from Company and Establishment Panels', Journal of Labour Economics, 15, pp. 318-37.
Hübler, Olaf and Uwe Jirjahn (2003). `Works Councils and Collective Bargaining in Germany: The Impact on Productivity and Wages', Scottish Journal of Political Economy, 50, 4, pp. 471-491.
Idson, Todd and Walter Oi (1999). `Workers Are More Productive in Large Firms', AEA, Papers and Proceedings, 89, 2, pp. 104-108.
Jirjahn, Uwe and Thomas Klodt (1999). `Lohnhöhe, industrielle Beziehungen und Produktmärkte', L. Bellmann, S. Kohaut and M. Lahner (Eds), Zur Entwicklung von Lohn und Beschäftigung auf der Basis von Betriebs- und Unternehmensdateien, Beiträge zur Arbeitsmarkt- und Berufsforschung, 220, S. 27-54.
Katz, Lawrence and Lawrence Summers (1989). `Industry Rents: evidence and implications', Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Microeconomics, pp. 209-275.
Krueger, Alan and Lawrence Summers (1988). `Efficiency Wages and the Inter-Industry Wage Structure', Econometrica, 56, pp. 259-293.
Lallemand, Thierry, Robert Plasman and François Rycx (2005). `Wage Structure and Firm Productivity in Belgium', Working Paper, N°05-14.RS, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Department of Applied Economics (DULBEA).
Lundin, Nannan and Lihong Yun (2003), `International Trade and Interindustry Wage Structure in Swedish Manufacturing: Evidence from matched employer-employee data', FIEF Working Paper Series, 196, Örebro.
Margolis, David and Kjell Salvanes (2001), `Do Firms Really Share Rents with their Workers', IZA DP, 330, Bonn.
Martins, Pedro S (2004), `Rent Sharing Before and After the Wage Bill', Queen Mary, University of London.
22

Nickell, S., J. Vainiomaki and S. Waidhwani (1994). `Wages and Product Market Power", Economica, 61, pp. 457-73.
Nopo, Hugo (2002), `Matching as a Tool to Decompose Wage Gaps', NorthWestern University, mimeo.
Oaxaca, R (1973). `Male-Female Wage Differentials in Urban Labor Markets', International Economic Review, 14, 3, pp. 693-709.
Rammer, Christian, Günther Ebling, Sandra Gottschalk, Norbert Janz, Bettina Peters and Tobias Schmidt (2003), `Innovationsverhalten der deutschen Wirtschaft', Indikatorenbericht zur Innovationserhebung 2002, Zentrum für Europäische Wirtschaftsforschung, Mannheim.
Sørensen, Anders (2001), `Inter-industry Wage Differentials and Productivity Growth', Centre for Economic and Business Research, Discussion Paper, 11, Copenhagen.
Stephan, Gesine, and Knut Gerlach (2004), `Collective Contracts, Wages and Wage Dispersion in a Multi-Level Model', IAB Discussion Paper, 6, Bonn.
Stephan, Helga and Eberhard Wiedemann (1990). `Lohnstruktur und Lohndifferenzierung in der DDR', Mitteilungen aus der Arbeitsmarkt- und Berufsforschung (MittAB), 4, S. 550 ­ 562.
Stephan, Helga and Eberhard Wiedemann (1990). `Lohnstruktur und Lohndifferenzierung in der DDR', Mitteilungen aus der Arbeitsmarkt- und Berufsforschung (MittAB), 4, S. 550 ­ 562.
SVR'00 (2000). Sachverständigenrat zur Begutachtung der gesamtwirtschaftlichen Entwicklung, `Chancen auf einen höheren Wachstumspfad', Jahresgutachten 2000/01, Wiesbaden.
SVR'04 (2004). Sachverständigenrat zur Begutachtung der gesamtwirtschaftlichen Entwicklung, 'Erfolge im Ausland - Herausforderungen im Inland', Jahresgutachten 2004/05, Wiesbaden.
SVR'94 (1994), Sachverständigenrat zur Begutachtung der gesamtwirtschaftlichen Entwicklung, `Den Aufschwung sichern ­ Arbeitsplätze schaffen', Jahresgutachten 1994/95, Wiesbaden.
SVR'99 (1999). Sachverständigenrat zur Begutachtung der gesamtwirtschaftlichen Entwicklung, `Wirtschaftspolitik unter Reformdruck', Jahresgutachten 1999/00, Wiesbaden.
Troske, Kenneth R. (1999). `Evidence on the Employer Size-Wage Premium from WorkerEstablishment Matched Data', The Review of Economics and Statistics, 81, pp. 15-26.
Winter-Ebmer, Rudolf and Josef Zweimüller (1999). `Firm Size Wage Differentials in Switzerland: Evidence from Job Changers', American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 89, 2, pp. 89-93.
23

Appendix

Appendix 1:

Detailed exposition of the decomposition of EX|W [Var (Y | x,W )] - EX|E Var (Y | x,E ) .

Using Nopo's (2002) extension of the well-known work of Blinder (1973) and Oxaca
(1973) we decompose the difference between EX|W [Var (Y | x,W )] and EX|E [Var (Y | x,E)]
into the following four additive components:

EX|W [Var (Y | x,W )] - EX|E [Var (Y | x,E )]

= 1W4e4st 2+ 4E43ast +

{Typ

+

{Reg

(i) Special component (ii) Different weight for

(iii) West-East differences of the variance

comparable type of firms

for comparable types of firms

, West is the component specific to the West. It represents the part of
EX|W [Var(Y | x,W )] - EX|E Var (Y | x,E) that can be attributed to those types of estab-
lishments that can be found exclusively in the West (,,WO" = ,,West Only").  West is formally defined as the difference between the average type-specific variance of the kinds of establishments found in the West only, and the average type-specific variance of those Western establishments, whose type is also observed in the East, weighted by the fraction of Western establishments with no match in the East,
PW (WO) :

  ( )West

=

 

Var (Y

 xWO

|

x,W

)

fW (x)
PW (WO)

-

Var (Y

xWAE

|

x,W

)

fW (x)
PW (WAE )

 

P

W



WO

East is the component specific to the East. It represents the part of EX|W [Var(Y | x,W )] -
EX|E Var (Y | x,E) that can be attributed to those types of establishments that can be found exclusively in the East (,,EO"="East Only"). ,East is formally defined as the difference between the average type-specific variance of the kinds of establishments found in the East only, and the average type-specific variance of those Eastern establishments, whose type is also observed in the West, weighted by the fraction of
Eastern establishments with no match in the West, PE (EO) :

{   } ( ) East =

Var (Y | x,E ) f E (x ) -
P E (WAE )

Var (Y | x,E ) f E ( x) P E EO
P E (EO )

xWAE

xEO

24

 Typ represents the part of EX|W [Var (Y | x,W )] - EX|E Var (Y | x,E ) that can be attributed

to unequal distributions in the West and the East of establishment types found in

both parts of the country . It arises from the fact that some establishment types are

found both in the East and the West (,,WAE"="West And East") ­ but with unequal

relative frequencies (different "type structures"). It is formally defined as the sum of

the type-specific variances in the West, weighted by the difference of the distribu-

tions with which these establishment types are observed in the West and East, re-

spectively::

 { }Typ =

Var [Y | x,W ]

-f W ( x )
PW (WAE )

fE (x)
PE (WAE )

xWAE

Finally, Reg represents the part of EX|W [Var (Y | x,W )] - EX|E Var (Y | x,E ) that can be at-
tributed to the West-East differences in plant-level wage variability among those establishments found in both parts of the country ­ i.e., the "true" regional variance differential between otherwise observationally identical establishments. It is formally defined as the sum of the type-specific East-West variance differentials, weighted by the fraction with which each type is found in the East::

 { } Reg =

Var (Y | x,E ) - Var (Y | x,W )

fE (x)
PE (WAE )

xWAE

In the empirical part, the variance functions Var (Y | x,E) and Var (Y | x,W ) , that are in-

tegral parts of all four components, are not assumed to adhere to a particular parametric functional relationship with the establishment type x. They will be nonparametrically estimated instead by calculating variances separately for each plant type x in both parts of the country.

25

Appendix 2: Applied Industry Classification
No. Industry
1 Agriculture, forestry, fishing 2 Energy, w ater supply 3 Coal mining 4 Other mining 5 Chemical products 6 Refining, coke 7 Plastics 8 Rubber products 9 Quarrying 10 Ceramics 11 Glas products 12 Iron and steel 13 Non ferrous metals 14 Foundries 15 Steel mills 16 Steel industry 17 Machinery equipment 18 Office and data processing equipment 19 Road vehicles 20 Vessels 21 Aircrafts and spacecrafts 22 Electrical engineering 23 Precision and optical instruments 24 Metal products 25 Furniture, toys 26 Wood 27 Wood products 28 Pulp and paper 29 Paper products 30 Printing 31 Leather 32 Textiles 33 Clothing 34 Food 35 Bevrages 36 Tobacco 37 Buildings and construction 38 Auxiliary construction 39 Wholesale trade 40 Retail trade 41 Railw ays 42 Other transports 43 Post and telecommunication 44 Banking 45 Insurances 46 Hotels and restaurants 47 Education 48 Health 49 Cleaning, personal services 50 Consulting 51 Other services 52 General government 53 Private households, NISPH 54 Others

BA Classifaction
00 - 03 04 05
04 - 08 09, 10
11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 - 22 23, 24 26, 27 33 28, 29 31 32 34 35, 36 37 38, 39 40 41, 42, 53 430 431 - 433 44 45, 46 47 - 51 52 54 - 56 57 58 59, 60 25, 61 620, 621 622 - 625 63 65 - 68 64 690 691 70, 71 74 -77 78 72, 73 79 80 - 85 91 - 94 87 - 90

26

Appendix 3: Applied Establishment Size Classes

Size class
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Number of employees
1 2-9 10 -19 20 - 49 50 - 99 100 - 199 200 - 499 500 - 999 1000 - 4999 5000 and more

27

SFB 649 Discussion Paper Series 2006
For a complete list of Discussion Papers published by the SFB 649, please visit http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de.
001 "Calibration Risk for Exotic Options" by Kai Detlefsen and Wolfgang K. Härdle, January 2006.
002 "Calibration Design of Implied Volatility Surfaces" by Kai Detlefsen and Wolfgang K. Härdle, January 2006.
003 "On the Appropriateness of Inappropriate VaR Models" by Wolfgang Härdle, Zdenk Hlávka and Gerhard Stahl, January 2006.
004 "Regional Labor Markets, Network Externalities and Migration: The Case of German Reunification" by Harald Uhlig, January/February 2006.
005 "British Interest Rate Convergence between the US and Europe: A Recursive Cointegration Analysis" by Enzo Weber, January 2006.
006 "A Combined Approach for Segment-Specific Analysis of Market Basket Data" by Yasemin Boztu and Thomas Reutterer, January 2006.
007 "Robust utility maximization in a stochastic factor model" by Daniel Hernández­Hernández and Alexander Schied, January 2006.
008 "Economic Growth of Agglomerations and Geographic Concentration of Industries - Evidence for Germany" by Kurt Geppert, Martin Gornig and Axel Werwatz, January 2006.
009 "Institutions, Bargaining Power and Labor Shares" by Benjamin Bental and Dominique Demougin, January 2006.
010 "Common Functional Principal Components" by Michal Benko, Wolfgang Härdle and Alois Kneip, Jauary 2006.
011 "VAR Modeling for Dynamic Semiparametric Factors of Volatility Strings" by Ralf Brüggemann, Wolfgang Härdle, Julius Mungo and Carsten Trenkler, February 2006.
012 "Bootstrapping Systems Cointegration Tests with a Prior Adjustment for Deterministic Terms" by Carsten Trenkler, February 2006.
013 "Penalties and Optimality in Financial Contracts: Taking Stock" by Michel A. Robe, Eva-Maria Steiger and Pierre-Armand Michel, February 2006.
014 "Core Labour Standards and FDI: Friends or Foes? The Case of Child Labour" by Sebastian Braun, February 2006.
015 "Graphical Data Representation in Bankruptcy Analysis" by Wolfgang Härdle, Rouslan Moro and Dorothea Schäfer, February 2006.
016 "Fiscal Policy Effects in the European Union" by Andreas Thams, February 2006.
017 "Estimation with the Nested Logit Model: Specifications and Software Particularities" by Nadja Silberhorn, Yasemin Boztu and Lutz Hildebrandt, March 2006.
018 "The Bologna Process: How student mobility affects multi-cultural skills and educational quality" by Lydia Mechtenberg and Roland Strausz, March 2006.
019 "Cheap Talk in the Classroom" by Lydia Mechtenberg, March 2006. 020 "Time Dependent Relative Risk Aversion" by Enzo Giacomini, Michael
Handel and Wolfgang Härdle, March 2006. 021 "Finite Sample Properties of Impulse Response Intervals in SVECMs with
Long-Run Identifying Restrictions" by Ralf Brüggemann, March 2006. 022 "Barrier Option Hedging under Constraints: A Viscosity Approach" by
Imen Bentahar and Bruno Bouchard, March 2006.
SFB 649, Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

023 "How Far Are We From The Slippery Slope? The Laffer Curve Revisited" by Mathias Trabandt and Harald Uhlig, April 2006.
024 "e-Learning Statistics ­ A Selective Review" by Wolfgang Härdle, Sigbert Klinke and Uwe Ziegenhagen, April 2006.
025 "Macroeconomic Regime Switches and Speculative Attacks" by Bartosz Makowiak, April 2006.
026 "External Shocks, U.S. Monetary Policy and Macroeconomic Fluctuations in Emerging Markets" by Bartosz Makowiak, April 2006.
027 "Institutional Competition, Political Process and Holdup" by Bruno Deffains and Dominique Demougin, April 2006.
028 "Technological Choice under Organizational Diseconomies of Scale" by Dominique Demougin and Anja Schöttner, April 2006.
029 "Tail Conditional Expectation for vector-valued Risks" by Imen Bentahar, April 2006.
030 "Approximate Solutions to Dynamic Models ­ Linear Methods" by Harald Uhlig, April 2006.
031 "Exploratory Graphics of a Financial Dataset" by Antony Unwin, Martin Theus and Wolfgang Härdle, April 2006.
032 "When did the 2001 recession really start?" by Jörg Polzehl, Vladimir Spokoiny and Ctlin Stric, April 2006.
033 "Varying coefficient GARCH versus local constant volatility modeling. Comparison of the predictive power" by Jörg Polzehl and Vladimir Spokoiny, April 2006.
034 "Spectral calibration of exponential Lévy Models [1]" by Denis Belomestny and Markus Reiß, April 2006.
035 "Spectral calibration of exponential Lévy Models [2]" by Denis Belomestny and Markus Reiß, April 2006.
036 "Spatial aggregation of local likelihood estimates with applications to classification" by Denis Belomestny and Vladimir Spokoiny, April 2006.
037 "A jump-diffusion Libor model and its robust calibration" by Denis Belomestny and John Schoenmakers, April 2006.
038 "Adaptive Simulation Algorithms for Pricing American and Bermudan Options by Local Analysis of Financial Market" by Denis Belomestny and Grigori N. Milstein, April 2006.
039 "Macroeconomic Integration in Asia Pacific: Common Stochastic Trends and Business Cycle Coherence" by Enzo Weber, May 2006.
040 "In Search of Non-Gaussian Components of a High-Dimensional Distribution" by Gilles Blanchard, Motoaki Kawanabe, Masashi Sugiyama, Vladimir Spokoiny and Klaus-Robert Müller, May 2006.
041 "Forward and reverse representations for Markov chains" by Grigori N. Milstein, John G. M. Schoenmakers and Vladimir Spokoiny, May 2006.
042 "Discussion of 'The Source of Historical Economic Fluctuations: An Analysis using Long-Run Restrictions' by Neville Francis and Valerie A. Ramey" by Harald Uhlig, May 2006.
043 "An Iteration Procedure for Solving Integral Equations Related to Optimal Stopping Problems" by Denis Belomestny and Pavel V. Gapeev, May 2006.
044 "East Germany's Wage Gap: A non-parametric decomposition based on establishment characteristics" by Bernd Görzig, Martin Gornig and Axel Werwatz, May 2006.
045 "Firm Specific Wage Spread in Germany - Decomposition of regional differences in inter firm wage dispersion" by Bernd Görzig, Martin Gornig and Axel Werwatz, May 2006.
SFB 649, Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

