BERLIN

SFB 6 4 9 E C O N O M I C R I S K

SFB 649 Discussion Paper 2006-047
The Division of Ownership in New Ventures
Dominique Demougin* Oliver Fabel**
* School of Business and Economics, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany
** Department of Economics, University of Konstanz, Germany
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".
http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de ISSN 1860-5664
SFB 649, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin

The Division of Ownership in New Ventures
Dominique Demougin School of Business and Economics
Humboldt University of Berlin
Oliver Fabel Department of Economics University of Konstanzy
June 1, 2006
Prof. Dominique Demougin, PhD, Walther-Rathenau-Chair in Organization Theory, School of Business and Economics, Humboldt University of Berlin, Spandauer Str. 1, 10178 Berlin, Germany; Fone: +49-(0)30-2093-1341; Fax: +49-(0)302093-1343; E-Mail: demougin@wiwi.hu-berlin.de.
yProf. Dr. Oliver Fabel, Chair for Managerial Economics, in particular Business Policy, Department of Economics, Faculty of Law, Economics, and Public Administration, University of Konstanz, Box D144, 78457 Konstanz, Germany; Fone: +49-(0)7531-88-2990/-2992; Fax: +49-(0)7531-88-4456; E-Mail: oliver.fabel@unikonstanz.de.

The authors acknowledge ...nancial support of the German Research Council's (DFG) Collaborative Research Center 649 "Economic Risk"and its Research Group 454 "Heterogeneous Labor". Signi...cant parts of this work have been ...nished while Demougin was a visiting scholar at BETA, University of Nancy 2, and Fabel at the Department of Economics, Finance, and Legal Studies, University of Alabama.
The authors have received helpful comments by participants of workshops at the Copenhagen Business School, organized by U. Kaiser and N. MalchowMoeller, the Center for European Economic Research (ZEW) in Mannheim, in particular G. Licht and I. Bertschek, and the Institute for Strategy and the Economics of the Firm at the University of Zürich, speci...cally U. BackesGellner and E. Franck. However, the usual disclaimer applies.

Abstract
The Division of Ownership in New Ventures
The current study investigates a tripartite incentive contract between an innovator supplying an intellectual asset, a professional assigned to productive tasks, and a consulting ...rm specializing in matching ideas and professional skills. A rather simple pure tripartite partnership implements the consultant's expected pro...t maximum and maximizes the project's expected surplus. The liquidity-constrained professional is compensated by receiving a share of one half in the new venture. The consultant's and the innovator's shares reect the relative value of search. However, the consultant's optimal search e¤ort to ...nd an appropriate production partner is ine¢ ciently low.
Keywords: new ventures, tripartite incentive contract, consulting contract, partnerships.
JEL-Classi...cations: M13 (Entrepreneurship), M21 (Business Economics)

1 Introduction
The current study investigates optimal incentive contracts to set up a new innovative ...rm. Three parties are involved in the project: the innovator supplying the idea for a new scienti...c application, a professional assigned to productive tasks, and a consultant specializing in matching innovators and professionals. The innovator's idea and the professional's e¤ort constitute productive complements while the consultant's matching e¤ort only increases the expected value of the project.2 The objective of this paper is to analyze the resulting tripartite mechanism design problem under moral hazard and adverse selection.
To ...x ideas, consider the following example. A biologist has identi...ed relevant antigenic proteins of a bacterium allowing the development of a new diagnostic test. To produce a marketable test, the researcher would require the cooperation of a partner with the appropriate experience in developing, producing, and marketing pharmaceuticals. Typically, a consultant then offers his services to match the scientist with an industrial partner. However, whilst the consultant searches for an adequate professional, he can only reserve the exclusive right to act as a middleman between the innovator and a candidate professional still to be introduced. The innovator retains the right to opt out until a formal memorandum of association is signed.
In this example, one would expect numerous incentive problems. Initially only the scientist will know the precision and the complexity of the new test compared to already existing diagnostic methods.3 However, only the professional possesses both some scienti...c expertise himself and industrial experience. Hence, the quality of the match between the innovator's idea
2Following Biais and Perotti (2003), for example, the consultant nevertheless provides the actual entrepreneurial innovation.
3Jensen et al. (2003), Chukumba and Jensen (2006), and Elfenbein (2006) provide more general discussions on the nature of an academic innovator's private information.
1

and the professional's productive skills constitutes private information of the latter. Involving a consultant can reduce the matching uncertainty for the innovator. Yet, it also introduces additional di¢ culties. Speci...cally, due to the sequential nature of the players' interactions the contract must be renegotiation-proof between the innovator and the consultant. Finally, neither the search e¤ort of the consultant nor the productive e¤ort of the professional are likely to be contractible.
The "consultant" in the description above resembles a university technology transfer center4 or, more generally, a "business angel", respectively a venture capitalist involved in "early-stage" project development.5 While our analysis is therefore closely related to the existing literature on venturecapital backed start-ups, the problem of matching ideas and skills in teams of innovators and professionals has so far not attracted much attention by economists. Typically, economic analyses focus on start-ups in the "...rst ...nancing stage".6 It has long been recognized that venture capitalists provide important consulting and management services.7 Thus, the optimal contract must solve a double moral hazard problem since both the innovator's and the "inside"investor's e¤orts a¤ect project success.
Specifying the type of moral hazard problem then allows to investigate the institutional structure of venture-capital backed ...rms. For example, Aghion and Bolton (1992), Dewatripont and Tirole (1994) and Hart and Moore (1994, 1998) analyze models in which the entrepreneur can generate non-transferable private bene...ts, "steal" part of the cash-ow, or threaten to leave the ...rm (which is worth less without her due to the inalienability of
4O'Shea and Allen (2006). Chukumba and Jensen (2006) analyze start-ups and licensing as substitute forms of technology transfer.
5 Sohl (2003a,b). 6Gompers and Lerner (2001), Kaplan and Strömberg (2001), and Botazzi and Da Rin (2002) provide extensive literature surveys. 7See e.g. Rind (1981), Tyebjee and Bruno (1984), Sahlman, (1990), Lerner (1995), and Hellmann and Puri (2002).
2

human capital). In this kind of environment, the optimal contract assigns to the venture capitalist the right to take control in the "poor"states of nature or respectively to liquidate the ...rm.
Other authors examine the time structure of contracts. For example, Admati and Peiderer (1994) and Cornelli and Yosha (2003) show that "staging"the ...nancing precludes mispricing securities, and/or "window dressing". Building upon a similar framework, Bergemann and Hege (1997) ...nd that increasing shareholdings of the venture capitalist reects her learning about the project's quality. Nöldecke and Schmidt (1998) and Lülfesmann (2004) show that contingent ownership contracts set e¢ cient incentives in such sequential investment problems - in particular, if the ...rst step requires to supply nonmarketable R&D-e¤ort. Thus, according to Schmidt (2003), the sequential nature of the double moral hazard problem implies the predominant use of convertible securities in ...nancing new ventures.8
While this literature exclusively analyzes bipartite incentive-problems between a credit-constrained innovator and a venture capitalist, there exists an understanding that start-ups pose the problem of aligning incentives in a multi-partite environment. Moreover, this environment does not reect the hierarchical structures common to most multi-agent problems discussed in the literature.9 For example, Rajan and Zingales (1998) and Dessi (2005) already analyze multi-partite contracting to found a new ...rm. However, the former analysis endogenizes the number of agents while assuming an exogenous ownership structure. Dessi (2005) focuses very speci...cally on the "...rst ...nancing phase" again. During this phase, the venture capitalist obtains additional information through his involvement in the new ...rm's operations. Hence, his decision to convert debt into ownership provides a credible signal concerning project quality to outside investors.
8This ...nding is empirically con...rmed by Kaplan and Strömberg (2000). At the same time, the study strongly supports the earlier analyses of the allocation of control rights.
9See Mookherjee (2005) for a recent survey and a taxonomy of principal-agent problems.
3

Obviously, it is di¢ cult to analyze the complex interplay of the di¤erent incentive-compatibility and collusion-proofness conditions in multi-partite problems. Thus, analyses of tripartite relationships are rare in the otherwise well developed contracting literature. Brown and Wolfstetter (1989) and Tsoulouhas (1999) constitute noticeable exceptions which also demonstrate, however, that solution concepts require a set of appropriate simpli...cations. In this respect, we have chosen to let the consultant act as a principal in the tripartite relationship10 which appears to ...t best with numerous case studies on high-tech start-ups. According to Dessi (2005), "the relative scarcity of venture capitalists'skills and expertise seems well-established"such as to support this assumption.11
Given this assumption, the subsequent analysis addresses the set of problems involved in matching ideas and skills during a start-up's "early stage". A risk-neutral innovator possesses private information concerning the value of her business idea. To realize the project she requires a professional. However, she has no expertise in recruitment herself and may therefore turn to a risk-neutral consultant. Professionals perform operative tasks and are assumed to be liquidity constrained.12 This assumption reects that high-tech ...rms - such as pharmaceutical, computer, and software companies - prefer to organize their new (joint) ventures as budgeted projects.13 Neither the value of the innovator's idea nor the e¤ort supplies of the consultant and the professional are veri...able. To align incentives between the three parties compensations can therefore only be conditioned on the resulting (net) revenue.
10Alternatively, one could introduce elements of cooperative game theory - such as the Shapley-value concept - in the otherwise non-cooperative game. See Perez-Castrillo and Wettstein (2005).
11 On this issue also see Biais and Perotti (2003). 12As is well known from Nöldecke and Schmidt (1998) and Lülfesmann (2004) the professional would otherwise o¤er an option-to-buyout contract. 13 Davila and Foster (2004, 2005).
4

The next crucial assumption of our model states that the consultant's initial contract o¤er to the innovator must be renegotiation-proof. The assumption implies that the terms of the incentive contract with the professional still to be found must be rationally anticipated and included in this initial o¤er. Although the model structure does not satisfy the standard requirements necessary to apply the revelation principle, renegotiation-proofness then allows to pursue a stepwise solution procedure similar to backward-induction.
As explained above, the professional, once found, can observe the innovator's type. Thus, solving a standard moral hazard problem, it is optimal to allocate a ...xed share of one half in the new venture to the professional. There are no additional ...xed payments. Since the professional's optimal contract is therefore independent of project-type, communication possesses no value. Nevertheless, contracting between the innovator and the consultant remains cumbersome. The contract must still simultaneously address the adverse selection problem with respect to innovator-types and the veri...cation problem concerning the consultant's choice of search intensity.
Our model analysis shows that the consultant's expected pro...t optimum requires to set ...xed payments equal to zero and only share the remaining half of the revenue with the innovator. Search e¤ort is enforced upon the consultant by the credible threat that the innovator could opt out. However, since the professional earns a rent, the intensity of search is ine¢ ciently low. Further, the sharing rule between the consultant and the innovator reects the relative value of the project-speci...c search activity. Consequently, the innovator cannot gain by misrepresenting her type and will report truthfully to the consultant. Concluding, the optimal tripartite contract constitutes a pure revenue-sharing contract among all three parties. It can be implemented through a governance structure in which ownership shares determine the three parties revenue claims.
The paper is organized as follows. The subsequent section introduces the
5

basic model, derives the value of the innovator's outside option, and explains the time-structure of the game. Section 3 derives the optimal tripartite contract. The ...nal section provides a summary and draws conclusions.

2 The model
2.1 The production and information structure
Consider an environment with risk-neutral parties. An innovator has generated a business idea of type = 0 drawn from a distribution G( ). In order to exploit this idea economically, she needs the assistance of an industry professional. Professionals can be of di¤erent ability not equally matched with the innovator's project type. The quality of the match - i.e., the "goodness of ...t"between the innovator's idea and the professional's skills - is denoted by x where x 2 [0; 1] is a random variable drawn from the distribution F (x; s). The variable s = 0 denotes search e¤ort in recruiting a professional. We assume that F (x; s) satis...es the regularity requirements Fs(x; s) < 0 and Fss(x; s) > 0.14 The innovator can delegate the search activity to a consultant. Production further requires the professional to supply e¤ort e 0.
Jointly, the innovative idea, quality of the match, and professional e¤ort generate revenue

y = xe:

(1)

where is an independently distributed, positive random variable with E( ) = 1. Revenue is understood to be net of all production costs except for the cost
14Intuitively, intensi...ed search generates a ...rst-order stochastic dominant distribution where the search technology satis...es the Convexity of Distribution Function Condition (CDFC). For a general reference, see Rogerson (1985).

6

of compensating the professional. The professional's private costs of e¤ort

are

given

by

the

quadratic

cost

function

e2 2

.

The

innovator

is

taken

to

incur

prohibitively high costs of searching for a professional on her own while the

consultant's search costs are c(s), with c0(s) > 0; c00(s) > 0, and c(0) = 0.

The contractual relationships between the parties are subject to multiple constraints summarized in the following assumption.

Assumption 1: All the relevant distributions are common knowledge. In addition,

1. if the innovator delegates search to a consultant, she observes the search e¤ ort;
2. upon contracting, but before supplying e¤ort, the professional observes and x;
3. third parties called upon to enforce the contract can only observe y and verify whether explicit contractual terms are ful...lled;
4. the professional is ...nancially constrained requiring payments to be nonnegative.

Assumptions 1.1 - 1.3 imply that contracting between the innovator and the consultant is subject to hidden action and hidden information preventing ...rst-best. Due to 1.4, contracting with the professional is also second-best because it must solve a moral hazard and adverse selection problem subject to a liquidity-constraint.
A very speci...c feature of our model is that, due to his experience in industrial production, the professional, once matched, actually observes the productive potential of the project, i.e., the value of x. In contrast, drawing
7

on his experience in matching ideas and professionals, the consultant can reduce but not eliminate the uncertainty about the quality x of a particular match. Finally and purely for tractability, we limit compensation rules to be linear in revenue y.15
2.2 The innovator's outside option
In this subsection we analyze the innovator's stand-alone project which results if she does not contract with a consultant and must ...nd a professional by herself. The expected pro...t from this alternative constitutes her outsideoption. Given that her search costs are assumed prohibitive, she draws x from the distribution F (x; 0). In the ensuing match with a professional, we assume she has the entire bargaining power. Accordingly, standard principal-agent analysis can be used to derive the optimal contract.
The informational structure for the innovator's stand-alone project follows directly from assumption 1.2, i.e. the agency relationship is subject to a moral hazard and adverse selection problem. After the parties are matched, an innovator (i.e. the principal) of type o¤ers a contract CIP = fa( ; r); b( ; r)g to the professional (i.e. the agent) where denotes the professional's report on x. Applying the revelation principle, the contract between a -innovator matched with a professional of type x yields a compensation a( ; x) + b( ; x)y for the professional.
Thus, the value of the outside option for an innovator of type can be
15Observe that we are only limiting the compensation rules to be linear, not the contract itself. Holmström and Milgrom (1987) provide further support for the linearity assumption given that contracts are intended to extend further into the new ...rm's future business.
8

derived as:

Z

v( ) = max

[ xe( ; x)

(e( ;x);a( ;x);b( ;x)) x=0

a( ; x)

b( ; x) xe( ; x)] dF (x; 0) , (I)

subject to (e ( ; x) ; x) = arg max a( ; ) + b( ; ) x
(;)

2
, 2

(IC)

a( ; x) + b( ; x) xe( ; x)

(e(

; x))2 2

=0

,

a( ; x) + b( ; x) xe( ; x) = 0, 8 .

(PC) (LL)

Notice that in (I) the term in the square bracket already constitutes the expected value taken over . The same observation holds for the following two constraints. Equality (IC) is the typical incentive compatibility constraint for an agency relationship with moral hazard and adverse selection and inequality (PC) is the participation condition. The limited liability requirement (LL) must then be satis...ed for all revenue realizations.

Proposition 1 If the innovator pursues her stand-alone project, she o¤ers

a type-independent incentive contract a ( ; r) = 0 and b ( ; r) = 1=2. Given

this optimal contract with the professional, the value of the outside option for

an innovator of type

is v(

)=

2
4

E

[x2js

=

0].

Proof. We initially substitute the ...rst-order constraint with respect to

e¤ort

b( ; x) x = e( ; x)

(2)

for (IC). After deriving the solution of this simpli...ed optimization problem, we verify that it satis...es truth-telling with respect to x as well.

Inserting from (2) into (PC) implies that the participation constraint cannot be binding. Also according to (2), bonus payments are non-negative.

9

Since a positive ...xed payment a( ; x) only reduces the innovator's expected

pro...t, (LL) implies a ( ; x) = 0. Using (2) to replace e( ; x) in the innova-

tor's objective function and optimizing pointwise yields b ( ; x) = b

Thus, e (

; x)

=

1 2

x. By insertion, we have

Z

v( ) =

1 ( x)2

x=0 2

1 ( x)2

dF (x; 0) =

2
E x2js = 0

.

44

=

1 2

.

(3)

Finally, observe that truth-telling with respect to x is trivially satis...ed since a and b are constant.

The optimal stand-alone contract is extremely simple. The innovator and the professional equally share the project's revenue. Since this revenue has been de...ned net of all production costs other than the professional's compensation, the optimal contract can thus be implemented by founding a partnership of equals. As one would expect in a moral hazard and adverse selection environment, the professional earns a positive rent. Moreover, within the current environment communication possesses no value as discussed by Demougin (1989) and Melumad and Reichelstein (1989).

2.3 The timing of the tripartite game
As discussed in the introduction, we assume that the consultant acts a principal in the tripartite agency problem. The timing of the tripartite game is as follows. First, the innovator observes the value of her project . Second, the consultant makes a take-or-leave-it contract o¤er CCI =
r; s(r); (r); (r); CCP to the innovator where r denotes the innovator's report about her project-type, s(r) the consultant's promised search intensity, (r) a ...xed payment to the innovator, and (r) her revenue share. Clearly, the compensation o¤er to the innovator is conditional on not opting out to pursue her stand-alone project. Further, the o¤er includes the speci...cation of a standard incentive contract CCP with a professional still to be found.
10

Thus, CCP = f ; ( ); ( )g where denotes the professional's report on x while ( ) and ( ) are the corresponding ...xed payment and and revenue claim of the professional.
Third, the innovator decides whether to accept the consultant's o¤er CCI. If she does not accept the contract, the innovator pursues her stand aloneproject. At stage four, the innovator makes her report r. Fifth, the consultant searches with intensity which is simultaneously observed by the innovator. Recall that, so far, the initial contract CCI has only established the exclusive right for the consultant to act as a middleman between the innovator and a professional found through the consultant's search activity. Thus, sixth, the innovator now decides whether or not to accept the compensation package f (r); (r)g or opt out to pursue her stand-alone project.
Seventh, a professional is drawn from the distribution F (x; s) and he observes and x. Eighth, based on the contract CCI, the consultant makes the take-or-leave-it o¤er CCP to the professional. At this stage, we require that the professional's contract o¤er does not lead to a renegotiation of the initial contract CCI between the consultant and the innovator. Said di¤erently, CCI is taken to constitute an equilibrium contract o¤er.16 Ninth, the professional makes the report about her information x.17 Finally, y is realized and payments are made according to the tripartite contract CCI.
16 In contrast, suppose CCP were not part of the innovator's contract CCI . At stage eight, the consultant would then o¤er a contract to the professional that maximizes his own expected pro...t based on his share of the revenue, i. e., (1 (r)). However, this contract cannot sustain in equilibrium. Indeed, the innovator would have an incentive to renegotiate to increase her ...xed payment and reduce her share . Obviously, the parties would anticipate this renegotiation.
17The fact that the professional's report combines both the information on x and would also obtain for more generalized production functions of the type y = q(x; )e:
11

3 The optimal tripartite contract

The existing literature does not allow to conclude that the revelation principle will generally apply in the tripartite game described above. In particular, if the innovator's report r ( ) were not type-revealing, the consultant's subjective belief concerning the conditional distribution of x would di¤er from that of the innovator at stage eight. We can therefore not use standard backward induction to solve for the optimal tripartite contract. Yet, given the assumption that the initial contract CCI is renegotiation-proof, we can still pursue a step-wise procedure.
Observe that, for CCI to be renegotiation-proof between the innovator and the consultant, CCP must maximize these two parties expected joint surplus net of the professional's compensation costs. Given that beliefs may di¤er between the innovator and the consultant, it would generally be di¢ cult to agree on a contract which maximizes expected joint pro...t.

However, due to the assumption that the professional observes the real-

izations of both and x, the contract is independent of the belief structure

in our model. Hence, let z = x and H(z) be any distribution of z over the

common support z 0. Consider the solution to the following problem: Z

max fze z)
[ (z); (z);e(z)] z 0

(z) + (z)ze (z)g dH(z)

(II)

subject to

(e (z) ; z) = arg max ( ) + ( )z
(;)

( )2 ,
2

(z) + (z)ze (z)

(e (z))2 2

=

0,

(z) + (z)z e (z) = 0, 8 .

(PIC)
(PPC) (PLL)

Again, the professional's incentive compatibility and participation constraints (PIC) and (PPC) are in terms of expectations taken over the revenue shock

12

, while the liquidity constraint (PLL) must be satis...ed for all realizations of revenue y.

Proposition 2 Independent of the belief structure, the optimal renegotiation-

proof contract CCP o¤ered to the professional is characterized by ( x) = 0

and

(

x) = 1=2.

The professional supplies e¤ort e

(

x)

=

1 2

x.

The proof follows exactly along the same lines as that of Proposition 1 and is therefore omitted. Hence, it is also true that communication between the consultant and the professional possesses no information value.

Given Proposition 2, the expected compensation costs associated with

the e¤ort supply e (

; x)

=

1 2

x can simply be inserted into the consultant's

problem to ...nd the optimal contract o¤er to the innovator CCI. Observe

that the revelation principle then applies for the remaining problem, since

the optimal contract with the professional CCP =

;

0;

1 2

is independent

of the parties'beliefs. In particular, the innovator cannot inuence the pro-

fessional's contract (thus, the resulting e¤ort supply) through variations in

reporting.

Hence, the consultant acting as the principal solves

()

( x)2

max E Ex
[ ( ); ( );s( )]

[1 2 ( )] ( ) c (s( )) j s( ) 4

(III)

subject to

2

(

s(

= arg max
r0
) = arg max [1 2 (

(r) + (r) 2 Ex

)]

2
4

Exfx2

j

g

x2 j s(r) , ( ) c( ) j

g,

subject to

( )+

(

)

2
2

Ex

fx2

j

g

v( ).

(IPC)

(IIC) (CCC)

The objective function (III), the innovators' incentive-compatibility con-

straints (IIC), and the consultant's credibility constraint (CCC) all contain

expected values taken over the revenue shock .

13

The latter constraint (CCC) states that, after the innovator has accepted the contract and made a report at stage four of the game, it must be optimal for the consultant to provide the promised search e¤ort. Thus, anticipating the e¤ort supply of a professional who must still be found, the consultant will determine his search activity to maximize his expected pro...t. Notice, however, that in maximizing his expected pro...t the consultant is constrained by the innovator's participation condition (IPC). If the expected income of the innovator would fall short of v( ), she would opt out and pursue her stand-alone project.

To solve the optimization problem (III), we begin by investigating the (CCC)-constraint. We initially assume that [1 2 ( )] 0. Subsequently, we verify that this requirement is indeed satis...ed.

Introducing a slackness variable ( ), we can rewrite the (IPC)-condition

as

2

( ) + ( ) 2 Ex x2 j s( ) v( ) ( ( ))2 = 0 .

(4)

Notice that, for every given ( ) > 0, the expected income of the innovator

is monotonically increasing in the consultant's search e¤ort. Thus, we can

substitute from (4) into the consultant's objective function at stage ...ve when

he decides upon his search intensity and rewrite (CCC) as

2

max
( ; ( ))

4 Ex

x2 j

v( ) ( ( ))2 c( ) .

(CCC')

Restating the consultant's credibility constraint immediately yields two conclusions. First,

2
s ( ) = arg max 4 Ex x2 j

c( ) .

(5)

Hence, search e¤ort in the tripartite contract is second-best because of the rent paid to the professional. Second, ( ) = 0 which implies that the innovator's participation constraint must be binding.

14

Intuitively, it is optimal for the consultant to maximize his expected pro...t by minimizing the expected costs of compensating the innovator. This compensation cost minimum is realized if the innovator's expected income just meets her participation constraint. Within the current framework, this solution can also serve to enforce the promised search e¤ort upon the consultant. He can credibly commit to search with intensity s ( ) because the innovator would opt out if the consultant would choose a lower intensity.2

Using this result, notice that, at stage 4, the innovator's optimization with respect to reporting will satisfy

v( ) =

2

max
r0

(r) + (r) 2 Ex x2 j s ( )

(6)

since the rational consultant will anticipate the innovator's reporting behavior. By the envelope theorem it must therefore be true that

2
v0( ) = 2 Ex x2 j 0 = ( ) Ex x2 j s ( ) .

(7)

Given the value of v( ) provided in Proposition 1 above, it follows that

(

)=

1 Ex fx2 j 2 Ex fx2 j s

0g ( )g

.

(8)

Observe that [1 2 ( )] > 0 for all such that s ( ) > 0. Hence, our initial assumption can now be veri...ed to be satis...ed. Finally, to obtain the optimal ...xed payment to the innovator we can substitute for ( ) into (IPC) which implies ( ) = 0.

This contract induces innovators to report correctly because their pay-

2Hence, the solution to the consultant's constraint optimization problem (CCC) does

not constitute tion (1 ( ))

anR

ihnterior solution xe( ; x) (e( ;

whicih would be characterized x))2 fs(x; s ( ))dx = c0(s ( )).

by the ...rst-order condiNotice that this interior

solution implies that e¤ort falls short of s ( ) for every ( ) > 0.

15

ments are actually independent of their reports. Observe that

2
(r) + (r) 2 Ex x2 j s (r)

=

0+

2
4

Exfx2 Ex fx2 j

j s

0g (r)g

Ex

x2 j s (r)

2

= 4 Exfx2 j 0g = v( ) .

(9)

Thus, whatever value r an innovator chooses to report, the consultant responds by searching with intensity s (r). Yet, in this case the innovator's share of revenue is given by (r) and, with ...xed payments (r) equal to zero, she again only obtains an expected equal to v( ). Since the innovator therefore possesses no incentive to misrepresent her type, the incentivecompatibility constraint (IIC) is clearly satis...ed as well.

Summing up the above analysis, yields the following:

Proposition 3 The optimal triparitite contract is characterized as

CCI = fs ( ) ; ( ) ; ( ) ; CCP g

=

fs

(

)

;

0;

1 2

Exfx2 Ex fx2 j

j s

0g ( )g

;

CCP

g,

(10)

where the consultant's search intensity s ( ) is implicitly characterized by

2Z

c0(s ( )) = 4

x2fs(x; s ( ))dx .

(11)

The proposition warrants some remarks. First, the conclusion that ( ) = 0 is important. Suppose to the contrary that ( ) > 0 for some realization of . Then individuals without any innovative project [ = 0] could report r, obtain this positive ...xed payment, and go bankrupt afterwards. Obviously, this solution is not viable since the consultant would attract an in...nity of such zero-value projects.

16

Second, the model yields a rather strong and testable prediction concerning the innovator's share. According to (8),

@ ( )= @

1 Exfx2 j 0g @Ex fx2 j s ( )g @s ( )

2 [Ex fx2 j s ( )g]2

@s( )

@

(12)

and, totally di¤erentiating (11), yields

@s ( ) = @

f@Ex x2js ( )g

2 @s( )
2 @2Exfx2js ( )g 4 (@s( ))2

>0. c00(s ( ))

(13)

Thus, the innovator's share decreases with higher project value.3 Economically, this result implies that industry-wide consulting activities increase with the proportion of high (above average) value projects. At the same time, the average innovator's share decreases.

Third, the optimal tripartite contract maximizing the consultant's ex-

pected pro...t also exhibits a very simple structure. Renegotiation-proofness

requires that the professional recruited by the consultant receives a share

of

1 2

of the revenue.

Thus, the consultant and the innovator can only dis-

tribute half of the expected revenue among them. As discussed above, they

cannot use ...xed payments to do so. Consequently, the optimal tripartite

contract can also be implemented by founding a partnership. Ownership

shares of (1

( ));

(

);

1 2

for the consultant, the innovator, and the

professional in this partnership of three then optimally determine the dis-

tribution of project revenue. Clearly, given the moral hazard problem when

contracting with a professional, renegotiation-proofness further implies that

the contract CCI maximizes the project's expected surplus.

Finally, recall that the innovator retains her right to opt out until the consultant has completed his search and turns back to her with a candidate professional. Hence, taking a only a slightly di¤erent perspective, this opting-out possibility of the innovator mirrors a contingent-ownership claim
3Nevertheless, the value of this share increases since v0 ( ) > 0.

17

of the consultant when he sets out to search for a professional: only contingent on the innovator's acceptance of the professional introduced by the consultant, the consultant can realize his ownership claim. Yet, the consultant's search e¤ort cannot be veri...ed and, in our model, takes place before the joint venture is formally founded. Hence, in contrast to the literature on debt conversion as means to implement contingent ownership claims, the consultant's contingent claim is part of an implicit contract.
4 Summary and conclusions
The current analysis investigates a tripartite incentive contract between an innovator supplying the idea for a new scienti...c application as a necessary asset, a professional assigned to productive tasks, and a consulting ...rm specializing in recruiting quali...ed personnel. Contracts can only be contingent on the venture's earnings gross of these parties' compensation costs. The optimal tripartite contract then implies pure (net) revenue-sharing. The liquidity-constrained professional receives a claim on half of the new venture's revenue.4 The innovator shares her remaining half with the consultant.
The sharing rule between the consultant and the innovator reects the relative value of the project-speci...c search activity. Thus, innovators can be taken to report their project value truthfully. Further, the innovator receives her reservation income which is equal to the expected value of their standalone project. This rule ensures that the promised search e¤ort is enforced on the consultant by the innovator's threat to opt out. Moreover, while the value of an innovator's partnership share increases with project value, the share itself actually decreases. Correspondingly, the consultant's share
4However, this particular sharing rule reects the quadratic cost assumption. Following Belleamme and Bloch (2000) and Hauswald and Hege (2003) asymmetries in the productive capacities of the necessary assets would yield asymmetric ownership strutures.
18

which compensates for his consulting service increases with higher project value.
These sharing-rules of the optimal tripartite incentive contract can be implemented formally by founding a partnership of three. Yet, in contrast to Biais and Perotti (2003), the respective ownership-shares taken in the new ...rm do not reect any transfer of ...nancial resources. Notice that in our model the professional becomes the majority owner. This view of optimal ownership structures in innovative ventures also contrasts with Casamatta (2003) and the related work on "stage ...nancing". In these studies the liquidity constraint of the innovator motivates the presence of a venture capitalist whose ...nancial involvement then provides useful instruments to set appropriate incentives.
Within the current framework, the prospect to become a partner which mirrors the innovator's option to participate or, else, pursue her stand-alone project sets appropriate incentives for the consultant as a matching-specialist. Thus, the current analysis also adds to the existing literature on contingentownership contracts. In Nöldecke and Schmidt (1998) and Lülfesmann (2004) the sequential order of ownership-acquisition reects the sequential nature of moral hazard problems. In contrast, the opting-out contract with pure revenue-sharing derived above provides e¢ cient incentives to simultaneously solve the moral hazard problem of the consultant and the adverse selection problem with respect to innovator-types. Formally, the opting-out alternative of the innovator is likely to be reected in a letter of intend signed with the consultant. Only if the innovator accepts the producer introduced by the consultant, the respective memorandum of association will then also be signed.
In fact, the "biologist"-example in the introduction constitutes the stylized account of a real case in which one of the authors was involved. The consultant being a venture capital subsidiary of a large pharmaceutical ...rm
19

introduced only one suitable producer which turned out to be a subsidiary of the same pharmaceutical.5 Likely, the scientist took this outcome to signal insu¢ cient search by the consultant. Thus, ending a lengthy period of negotiating up-front investments - i.e., ...xed payments - which were supposed to reect asset values, the scientist actually opted out. He is now pursuing his work on new diagnostics heading the research division of a super-national health organization.
5 References
Admati, A.R. and P. Peiderer. (1994). Robust Financial Contracting and the Role of Venture Capitalists. Journal of Finance, vol. 49, p. 371-402.
Aghion, P. and P. Bolton. (1992). An Incomplete Contracts Approach to Financial Contracting. Review of Economic Studies, vol. 59, p. 473494.
Belleamme, P. and F. Bloch. (2000). Optimal Ownership Structures in Asymmetric Joint Ventures. Department of Economics, Queen Mary & West...eld College, University of London, Working Paper No. 411.
Bergemann, D. and U. Hege. (1997). Venture Capital Financing, Moral Hazard, and Learning. Journal of Banking and Finance, vol. 22, p. 703-735.
Biais, B. and E. Perotti. (2003). Entrepreneurs and New Ideas. Toulouse, IDEI, Working Paper No. 347.
5Wright et al. (2004) point out that venture capitalists who o¤er their services as "early stage" consultants are often subsidiaries or a departments of industrial ...rms.
20

Botazzi, L. and M. Da Rin. (2002). Venture Capital in Europe and the Financing of Innovative Companies. Economic Policy, vol. 34, p. 231269.
Brown, M. and E. Wolfstetter. (1989). Tripartite Income-Employment Contracts and Coalition Incentive Compatibility. RAND Journal of Economics, vol. 20, p. 291-307.
Casamatta, C. (2004). Financing and Advising: Optimal Financial Contracts with Venture Capitalists. Journal of Finance, vol. 58, p. 2059 2086.
Chukumba, C.O: and R. A. Jensen. (2006). University Invention, Entrepreneurship, and Start-Ups. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, forthcoming.
Cornelli, F. and O. Yosha. (2003). Stage Financing and the Role of Convertible Debt. Review of Economic Studies, vol. 70, p. 1-32.
Davila, T. and G. Foster. (2004). Management Accounting Systems Adoption: Evidence and Performance Implications from Startup Companies. Graduate School of Business, Stanford University, Research Paper No. 1874.
Davila, T. and G. Foster. (2005). Startup Firms: Growth, Management Control Systems Adoption, and Performance. IESE Business School, University of Navarra, Working Paper No. 603.
Demougin, D. M. (1989). A Renegotiation-Proof Mechanism for a PrincipalAgent Model with Moral Hazard and Adverse Selection. RAND Journal of Economics, vol. 20, p. 256-267.
Dessi, R. (2005). Start-up Financing, Monitoring, and Collusion. RAND Journal of Economics, vol. 36, p. 255-274.
21

Dewatripont, M. and J. Tirole. (1994). A Theory of Dept and Equity: Diversity of Securities and Manager-Shareholder Congruence. Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 109, p. 1027-1054.
Elfenbein, D.W. (2006) Publications, Patents, and the Market for University Inventions. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, forthcoming.
Gompers, P.A. and J. Lerner. (2001). The Venture Capital Revolution. Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 15, p. 145-168.
Hart, O. and J. Moore. (1994). A Theory of Dept Based on the Inalienability of Human Capital. Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 109, p. 851-879.
Hart, O. and J. Moore. (1998). Default and Renegotiation: A Dynamic Model of Dept. Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 113, p. 1-41.
Hauswald, R. and U Hege. (2003). Ownership and Control in Joint Ventures: Theory and Evidence. Groupe HEC, Paris, Les Cahiers de Recherche No. 750.
Hellmann, T. and M. Puri. (2002). Venture Capital and the Professionalization of Start-Up Firms: Empirical Evidence. Review of Financial Studies, vol. 13, p. 959-984.
Holmström, B. and P.R. Milgrom. (1987). Aggregation and Linearity in the Provision of Intertemporal Incentives. Econometrica, vol. 55, p. 303-328.
Jensen, R.A. , J.G. Thursby, and M.C: Thursby. (2003). The Disclosure and Licensing of University Inventions. International Journal of Industrial Organization, vol. 21, p. 1255-1270.
Kaplan, S.N. and P. Strömberg. (2000). Financial Contracting Meets the Real World: An Empirical Analysis of Venture Capital Contracts.
22

University of Chicago, Graduate School of Business, The Center for Research in Security Prices, Working Paper No. 513.
Kaplan, S.N. and P. Strömberg. (2001). Venture Capitalist as Principals: Contracting, Screening and Monitoring. American Economic Review, vol. 91, p. 426-430.
Lülfesmann, C. (2004). Research Collaborations with Sequential Investments. Economica, vol. 71, p. 24 -259.
Lerner, J. (1995). Venture Capitalists and the Oversight of Private Firms. Journal of Finance, vol. 50, p. 301-318.
Melumad, N.D. and S. Reichelstein. (1989). Value of Communication in Agencies. Journal of Economic Theory, vol. 47, p. 334-368.
Mookherjee, D. (2005). Decentralization, Hierarchies and Incentives: A Mechanism Design Perspective. Boston University, Department of Economics, Working Paper No. WP2005-033.
Nöldecke, G. and K. Schmidt. (1998). Sequential Investments and Options to Own. RAND Journal of Economics, vol. 29, p. 633-653.
O'Shea, R.P. and T.J. Allen. (2006). Determinants and Consequences of University Spino¤ Activity: A Conceptual Framework. In: Therin, F. (ed), Handbook of Techno-Entrepreneurship, Edward Elgar, forthcoming.
Perez-Castrillo, D. and D. Wettstein. (2005). Implementation of the Ordinal Shapley Value for a Three Agent Economy. Economics Bulletin, vol. 3, p. 1-8.
Rajan, R.G. and L. Zingales. (1998). Power in a Theory of the Firm. Quarterly Journal of Political Economy, vol. 113, p. 387-432.
23

Rind, K.W. (1981). The Role of Venture Capital in Corporate Development. Strategic Management Journal, vol. 2, p. 169-180.
Rogerson, W.P. (1985). The First-Order Approach to Principal-Agent Problems. Econometrica, vol. 53, p. 1357-1368.
Sahlman, W. (1990). The Structure and Governance of Venture-Capital Organizations. Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 27, p. 473-521.
Schmidt, K. (2003). Convertible Securities and Venture Capital Finance. Journal of Finance, vol. 58, p. 1139-1166.
Sohl, J.E. (2003a). The US Angel and Venture Capital Market: Recent Trends and Developments. Journal of Private Equity, vol. 6, p. 7-17.
Sohl, J.E. (2003b). The Private Equity Market in the USA: Lessons from Volatility. Venture Capital, vol. 5, p. 29-46.
Tsoulouhas, T. (1999). Renegotiation-Proof Labour and Credit Contracts with Worker Mobility. Economica, vol. 66, p. 433-454.
Tyebjee, T.T. and A.V. Bruno. (1984). A Model of Venture Capitalist Investment Activity. Management Science, vol. 9, p. 1051-1066.
Wright, M., A. Vohora, A. Lockett. (2004). The Formation of High-Tech Spinouts: The Role of Joint Ventures and Venture Capital Investors. Journal of Technology Transfer, vol. 29, p. 287-310.
24

SFB 649 Discussion Paper Series 2006
For a complete list of Discussion Papers published by the SFB 649, please visit http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de.
001 "Calibration Risk for Exotic Options" by Kai Detlefsen and Wolfgang K. Härdle, January 2006.
002 "Calibration Design of Implied Volatility Surfaces" by Kai Detlefsen and Wolfgang K. Härdle, January 2006.
003 "On the Appropriateness of Inappropriate VaR Models" by Wolfgang Härdle, Zdenk Hlávka and Gerhard Stahl, January 2006.
004 "Regional Labor Markets, Network Externalities and Migration: The Case of German Reunification" by Harald Uhlig, January/February 2006.
005 "British Interest Rate Convergence between the US and Europe: A Recursive Cointegration Analysis" by Enzo Weber, January 2006.
006 "A Combined Approach for Segment-Specific Analysis of Market Basket Data" by Yasemin Boztu and Thomas Reutterer, January 2006.
007 "Robust utility maximization in a stochastic factor model" by Daniel Hernández­Hernández and Alexander Schied, January 2006.
008 "Economic Growth of Agglomerations and Geographic Concentration of Industries - Evidence for Germany" by Kurt Geppert, Martin Gornig and Axel Werwatz, January 2006.
009 "Institutions, Bargaining Power and Labor Shares" by Benjamin Bental and Dominique Demougin, January 2006.
010 "Common Functional Principal Components" by Michal Benko, Wolfgang Härdle and Alois Kneip, Jauary 2006.
011 "VAR Modeling for Dynamic Semiparametric Factors of Volatility Strings" by Ralf Brüggemann, Wolfgang Härdle, Julius Mungo and Carsten Trenkler, February 2006.
012 "Bootstrapping Systems Cointegration Tests with a Prior Adjustment for Deterministic Terms" by Carsten Trenkler, February 2006.
013 "Penalties and Optimality in Financial Contracts: Taking Stock" by Michel A. Robe, Eva-Maria Steiger and Pierre-Armand Michel, February 2006.
014 "Core Labour Standards and FDI: Friends or Foes? The Case of Child Labour" by Sebastian Braun, February 2006.
015 "Graphical Data Representation in Bankruptcy Analysis" by Wolfgang Härdle, Rouslan Moro and Dorothea Schäfer, February 2006.
016 "Fiscal Policy Effects in the European Union" by Andreas Thams, February 2006.
017 "Estimation with the Nested Logit Model: Specifications and Software Particularities" by Nadja Silberhorn, Yasemin Boztu and Lutz Hildebrandt, March 2006.
018 "The Bologna Process: How student mobility affects multi-cultural skills and educational quality" by Lydia Mechtenberg and Roland Strausz, March 2006.
019 "Cheap Talk in the Classroom" by Lydia Mechtenberg, March 2006. 020 "Time Dependent Relative Risk Aversion" by Enzo Giacomini, Michael
Handel and Wolfgang Härdle, March 2006. 021 "Finite Sample Properties of Impulse Response Intervals in SVECMs with
Long-Run Identifying Restrictions" by Ralf Brüggemann, March 2006. 022 "Barrier Option Hedging under Constraints: A Viscosity Approach" by
Imen Bentahar and Bruno Bouchard, March 2006.
SFB 649, Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

023 "How Far Are We From The Slippery Slope? The Laffer Curve Revisited" by Mathias Trabandt and Harald Uhlig, April 2006.
024 "e-Learning Statistics ­ A Selective Review" by Wolfgang Härdle, Sigbert Klinke and Uwe Ziegenhagen, April 2006.
025 "Macroeconomic Regime Switches and Speculative Attacks" by Bartosz Makowiak, April 2006.
026 "External Shocks, U.S. Monetary Policy and Macroeconomic Fluctuations in Emerging Markets" by Bartosz Makowiak, April 2006.
027 "Institutional Competition, Political Process and Holdup" by Bruno Deffains and Dominique Demougin, April 2006.
028 "Technological Choice under Organizational Diseconomies of Scale" by Dominique Demougin and Anja Schöttner, April 2006.
029 "Tail Conditional Expectation for vector-valued Risks" by Imen Bentahar, April 2006.
030 "Approximate Solutions to Dynamic Models ­ Linear Methods" by Harald Uhlig, April 2006.
031 "Exploratory Graphics of a Financial Dataset" by Antony Unwin, Martin Theus and Wolfgang Härdle, April 2006.
032 "When did the 2001 recession really start?" by Jörg Polzehl, Vladimir Spokoiny and Ctlin Stric, April 2006.
033 "Varying coefficient GARCH versus local constant volatility modeling. Comparison of the predictive power" by Jörg Polzehl and Vladimir Spokoiny, April 2006.
034 "Spectral calibration of exponential Lévy Models [1]" by Denis Belomestny and Markus Reiß, April 2006.
035 "Spectral calibration of exponential Lévy Models [2]" by Denis Belomestny and Markus Reiß, April 2006.
036 "Spatial aggregation of local likelihood estimates with applications to classification" by Denis Belomestny and Vladimir Spokoiny, April 2006.
037 "A jump-diffusion Libor model and its robust calibration" by Denis Belomestny and John Schoenmakers, April 2006.
038 "Adaptive Simulation Algorithms for Pricing American and Bermudan Options by Local Analysis of Financial Market" by Denis Belomestny and Grigori N. Milstein, April 2006.
039 "Macroeconomic Integration in Asia Pacific: Common Stochastic Trends and Business Cycle Coherence" by Enzo Weber, May 2006.
040 "In Search of Non-Gaussian Components of a High-Dimensional Distribution" by Gilles Blanchard, Motoaki Kawanabe, Masashi Sugiyama, Vladimir Spokoiny and Klaus-Robert Müller, May 2006.
041 "Forward and reverse representations for Markov chains" by Grigori N. Milstein, John G. M. Schoenmakers and Vladimir Spokoiny, May 2006.
042 "Discussion of 'The Source of Historical Economic Fluctuations: An Analysis using Long-Run Restrictions' by Neville Francis and Valerie A. Ramey" by Harald Uhlig, May 2006.
043 "An Iteration Procedure for Solving Integral Equations Related to Optimal Stopping Problems" by Denis Belomestny and Pavel V. Gapeev, May 2006.
044 "East Germany's Wage Gap: A non-parametric decomposition based on establishment characteristics" by Bernd Görzig, Martin Gornig and Axel Werwatz, May 2006.
045 "Firm Specific Wage Spread in Germany - Decomposition of regional differences in inter firm wage dispersion" by Bernd Görzig, Martin Gornig and Axel Werwatz, May 2006.
SFB 649, Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

046 "Produktdiversifizierung: Haben die ostdeutschen Unternehmen den Anschluss an den Westen geschafft? ­ Eine vergleichende Analyse mit Mikrodaten der amtlichen Statistik" by Bernd Görzig, Martin Gornig and Axel Werwatz, May 2006.
047 "The Division of Ownership in New Ventures" by Dominique Demougin and Oliver Fabel, June 2006.
SFB 649, Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

