BERLIN

SFB 6 4 9 E C O N O M I C R I S K

SFB 649 Discussion Paper 2007-052
Capturing Common Components in HighFrequency Financial Time Series: A Multivariate Stochastic Multiplicative
Error Model
Nikolaus Hautsch*
* Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".
http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de ISSN 1860-5664
SFB 649, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin

Capturing Common Components in High-Frequency Financial Time Series: A Multivariate Stochastic Multiplicative Error Model
Nikolaus Hautsch
Humboldt-Universit¨at zu Berlin
July 2007
Abstract
We introduce a multivariate multiplicative error model which is driven by componentspecific observation driven dynamics as well as a common latent autoregressive factor. The model is designed to explicitly account for (information driven) common factor dynamics as well as idiosyncratic effects in the processes of high-frequency return volatilities, trade sizes and trading intensities. The model is estimated by simulated maximum likelihood using efficient importance sampling. Analyzing five minutes data from four liquid stocks traded at the New York Stock Exchange, we find that volatilities, volumes and intensities are driven by idiosyncratic dynamics as well as a highly persistent common factor capturing most causal relations and cross-dependencies between the individual variables. This confirms economic theory and suggests more parsimonious specifications of high-dimensional trading processes. It turns out that common shocks affect the return volatility and the trading volume rather than the trading intensity. Keywords: Multiplicative error models, common factor, efficient importance sampling, intraday trading process JEL Classification: C15, C32, C52
1 Introduction
Numerous empirical studies have documented a strong positive contemporaneous relation between daily aggregated volume and volatility. This observation is consistent with the mixture-of-distribution hypothesis (MDH) pioneered by Clark (1973). The MDH relies on
Institute for Statistics and Econometrics, School of Business and Economics as well as Center for Applied Statistics and Economics (CASE), Humboldt-Universit¨at zu Berlin. Address: Spandauer Str. 1, D-10178 Berlin, Germany. Email: Nikolaus.Hautsch@wiwi.hu-berlin.de. Tel: +49 30 20935711, fax: +49 30 20935712. Acknowledgements: Earlier versions of this paper have been presented at the EC2 conference 2003 in London, at the International Conference on Finance in Copenhagen, 2005, the 2005 Arne Ryde Workshop in Financial Economics in Lund, the International Conference on High Frequency Finance in Konstanz, 2006, the 2006 meeting of the European Econometric Society in Vienna as well as the 2006 meeting of the German Economic Association in Bayreuth. For valuable comments we would like to thank Torben G. Andersen, Luc Bauwens, Tim Bollerslev, Robert F. Engle, Timo Ter¨asvirta, Winfried Pohlmeier as well as the seminar participants at the Stockholm School of Economics, the Universit´e Libre de Bruxelles and the Humboldt-Universit¨at zu Berlin. This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".
1

central limit arguments based on the assumption that daily returns consist of the sum of a "large" amount of intradaily logarithmic price changes associated with "pseudo" intraday equilibria. The assumption that these intraday price changes are also accompanied by an increased trading volume leads to an extension of Clark's model and implies a positive contemporaneous correlation between daily volume and volatility.1
Whereas the employed central limit arguments provide a sensible framework for aggregated (daily) data, they are not applicable on a high-frequency level since the number of underlying "pseudo" equilibria cannot be large but converge to zero when we approach the transaction level. Nevertheless, under the assumption that daily volumes and returns, both consisting of intraday aggregates, are driven by a subordinated common process, then the latter should be identifiable also on an intraday level. Actually, the idea of an underlying (unobservable) information process is also consistent with most asymmetric information based market microstructure models as e.g. introduced by Glosten and Milgrom (1985) and Easley and O`Hara (1992). In these settings, positive contemporaneous correlations between trading volumes and volatilities arise by the interaction among asymmetrically informed market participants. However, market microstructure theory is typically relatively vague, if not silent, regarding the underlying time horizon and thus the frequency on which common information-induced effects should be observable. On the other hand, several empirical studies provide evidence for common movements and strong interdependencies in high-frequency volatilities and trading intensities2 supporting the notion of an underlying common component jointly driving trading activity and volatility.
In this study, we aim to analyze whether a common component in volatilities and trading volumes is identifiable not only based on daily data but also on higher sampling frequencies, such as e.g. five minutes. We associate this hypothesis with a "micro-foundation" of the volume-volatility relationship. In this context, we will answer the following research questions: (i) To which extend do the interdependencies between volume and volatility reflect ("true") causal relationships or rather spurious correlations due to the subordination to the same latent (information arrival) process? (ii) Are potential common movements with volatilities rather reflected in trade sizes or trading intensities or both? (iii) Which of the particular components of the trading process react strongest to a common (information) shock? (iv) How strong and important are remaining serial interdependencies between the individual components even when a common dynamic factor is explicitly taken into account? (v) Does the inclusion of a common latent component leads to more parsimonious
1 See Epps and Epps (1976), Tauchen and Pitts (1983), Lamoureux and Lastrapes (1990), Andersen (1996) or Liesenfeld (2001).
2See e.g. Engle (2000), Grammig and Wellner (2002), Renault and Werker (2003), Manganelli (2005), Meddahi, Renault, and Werker (2006) or Bowsher (2006).
2

specifications of high-dimensional trading processes? To address these questions, we propose modelling the return volatility, the averaged
trade size, and the number of trades per time in terms of a new type of multiplicative error model (MEM) which is driven by two different dynamic processes: a common autoregressive latent factor with component-specific sensitivity and an observation driven (VARMA type) dynamic capturing idiosyncratic effects. The resulting model is called stochastic multiplicative error model (SMEM) and extends the multiplicative error structures as suggested by Engle (2002) and Manganelli (2005) by a latent factor dynamic.
The proposed approach is motivated by two major aspects: Firstly, a well known result in the literature on tests of the MDH is that a single latent component is typically not sufficient to fully capture the short-run dynamic dependencies in both volume and volatility. As argued e.g. in Andersen (1996) and Bollerslev and Jubinski (1999), it is likely that different types of "news", such as scheduled macroeconomic announcements, option expiration days or company specific earnings announcements affect the volatility and volume processes differently. For instance, macroeconomic announcements lead to relatively short-lived jumps in volatility but to longer-lasting increases of the trading volume. In contrast, earnings announcements are typically accompanied by strong price shifts combined with relatively little trading activity. Including such idiosyncratic effects requires to account for additional factors. However, instead of allowing for multiple latent factors (as e.g. in Liesenfeld, 2001), the SMEM captures these effects in terms of observation driven dynamics. This idea has been suggested by Bauwens and Hautsch (2006) and leads to a still flexible, but computationally less burdensome specification since only one factor is assumed to be unobservable and has to be integrated out.
Secondly, combining a common latent dynamic with (multivariate) observation driven components can be seen as a reduced form description of the trading dynamics generated by a subordinated information process and by asymmetrically informed market agents. In asymmetric information based market microstructure models3, (uninformed) traders try to infer the existence of information by observing the recent trading history. This leads to distinct (cross-)autocorrelation structures between price changes, volumes, trading intensities as well as bid-ask spreads which are tested in a wide range of empirical market microstructure studies.4 In the SMEM, the latent factor can be interpreted as a proxy for the underlying information process which simultaneously affects volatilities, trade sizes and trading intensities. Then, the observation driven dynamics capture component-specific
3See, e.g., Glosten and Milgrom (1985), Admati and Pfleiderer (1988), Easley and O`Hara (1992), Blume, Easley, and O`Hara (1994) and Easley, Kiefer, O`Hara, and Paperman (1996) among others.
4See e.g. Engle (2000) and Manganelli (2005) or the surveys by Bauwens and Giot (2001) or Hautsch (2004).
3

adjustment processes after (possibly information caused) innovation shocks in the particular trading variables. The latter effects reflect how common information is processed in the market and how market participants' conditional expectations on future volatilities and trading volumes are updated based on the observable trade history.
Though the SMEM cannot be seen as a structural model, it nevertheless allows us to study trading processes in a more structural way than in completely reduced form descriptions of trading processes (as e.g. Hasbrouck, 1991 Dufour and Engle, 2000, Engle, 2000 or Manganelli, 2005). Disentangling the trading dynamics in the proposed form makes it possible to explicitly control for a common factor and therefore enables us to analyze to which extend the individual trading components reflect (unobservable) joint information. For instance, based on daily data, Jones, Kaul, and Lipson (1994) show that the positive relation between volatility and average trade size is statistically insignificant when the effects of the number of transactions on stock return volatility are taken into account. In contrast, Xu and Wu (1999), Chan and Fong (2000) and Huang and Masulis (2003) find that the average trade size contains nontrivial information for return volatility. Tran (2006) decomposes the return volatility into an erratic factor (being particularly sensitive to new information) as well as a persistent factor and shows that both the trading intensity and the average trade size are positively correlated with the former. Our study contributes to this literature and sheds some light on the specific information content of the individual trading components.
The SMEM is estimated by simulated maximum likelihood (SML). The computation of the likelihood requires to integrate the latent component out leading to an integral of the dimension of the sample range. To approximate the likelihood function numerically we suggest using the efficient importance sampling (EIS) algorithm proposed by Richard (1998) and Richard and Zhang (2005). In the empirical applications, it turns out that the SML-EIS estimation of the SMEM works very efficiently and is computationally feasible.
In the empirical analysis, we use five minutes aggregates from four highly liquid stocks traded at the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE). Strong empirical evidence for the existence of an autoregressive common component is provided. We find that the unobservable factor is a major driving force of the interdependencies as well as the contemporaneous relations between the individual trading components. Hence, most causal effects between volatility, trade size and trading intensity are indeed driven by a common factor confirming the notion of an underlying information process. It turns out that the latent component has a particularly strong effect on the return volatility as well as the average trade size which confirms the findings based on daily data (see e.g. Tauchen and Pitts, 1983, Chan and Fong, 2000 or Liesenfeld, 2001) and can be seen as a "micro-foundation" of the daily
4

volume-volatility relationship. In contrast, the trading intensity is only weakly affected by the underlying component which is contrast to the results by Jones, Kaul, and Lipson (1994). Moreover, it is shown that the inclusion of the latent component clearly improves the goodness-of-fit as well as the dynamical and distributional properties of the model. This illustrates the usefulness of combining observation driven and parameter driven dynamics and opens up new directions to estimate and predict trading processes.
The remainder of the paper is organized in the following way: Section 2 presents the SMEM while Section 3 discusses its statistical properties. In Section 4, we illustrate the statistical inference. Section 5 shows the data and discusses the estimation results. Finally, Section 6 concludes.

2 The Multivariate Stochastic Multiplicative Error Model

Define {Yi, Vi, i}, i = 1, . . . , N, as the three-dimensional time series associated with the intraday process of returns, transaction volumes and trading intensities, respectively. In particular, Yi corresponds to the log return measured over equi-distant time intervals (here five minutes intervals), Vi is the average volume per trade in the i-th interval and i is the number of trades occurring during interval i. Furthermore, i is defined as a common unobservable component that simultaneously influences Yi, Vi and i and follows an autoregressive process which is updated in every interval i.
Define Wi = {wj}ij=1 with wi = (Yi, Vi, i) and i = {j}ji=1 and denote Fi := (Wi, i) as the history of the process up to period i. Following Engle (2000) and Manganelli (2005), we propose decomposing the joint conditional density given Fi-1, f (Yi, Vi, i, i|Fi-1), into the product of the corresponding conditional densities. Hence,

f (Yi, Vi, i, i|Fi-1) = f (Yi|Vi, i, i; Fi-1) · f (Vi, i, i; Fi-1)

(1)

= f (Yi|Vi, i, i; Fi-1) · f (Vi|i, i; Fi-1) · f (i|i; Fi-1) · f (i; i-1),

where it is assumed that i depends only on its own history i-1. The chosen decomposition implies that Vi is weakly exogenous for Yi, whereas i is weakly exogenous for both Yi and Vi. Finally, i itself is assumed not to be affected by any contemporaneous variable. Of course, the order of the variables in the decomposition is somewhat arbitrary and depends on the research objective. Here, we proceed along the lines of Engle (2000) and Manganelli (2005) who are particularly interested in the volatility process given the contemporaneous volume and the contemporaneous trading intensity.
The basic idea of the SMEM is to combine observation driven dynamics with parameter driven dynamics in a multivariate multiplicative error framework as introduced by Engle (2002) and put forward by Engle and Gallo (2006) and Cipollini, Engle, and Gallo (2007).

5

Then, a three-dimensional SMEM for volatilities, trade sizes and trading intensities is given by

Yi = E[Yi|Fi-1] + i, i = hie1i sh,ii, Vi = ie2i sV,iui, i = ie3i s,ii,

i  i.i.d. N (0, 1), ui  i.i.d. GG(p2, m2), i  i.i.d. GG(p3, m3),

(2) (3) (4) (5)

where hi, i and i denote observation driven dynamic components, i, ui and i are process-specific innovation terms which are assumed to be independent, and sh,i, sV,i, s,i > 0 capture deterministic time-of-day effects in volatilities, trade sizes, and trading intensities, respectively. We assume that the volatility innovations i follow a standard normal distribution whereas the volume and trading intensity innovations ui and i follow a standard generalized gamma distribution depending on the parameters p2, m2 and p3, m3, respectively. The generalized gamma distribution allows for a high distributional flexibility including the cases of over-dispersion and under-dispersion as well as non-monotonic hazard shapes.5
The component hie1ish,i corresponds to the conditional variance of the returns given Fi-1, i, and the time of the day. Accordingly, up to a constant multiplicative factor6, ie2isV,i and ie3is,i correspond to the conditionally expected volume and the conditionally expected trading intensity given Fi-1, i, and the time of the day. Hence, the major idea of the SMEM is to model these conditional moments on the basis of a multiplicative interaction of the processes {hish,i, isV,i, is,i} and ei. Then, the parameters 1, 2 and 3 drive the process-specific impact of i.
The common latent factor i is assumed to follow a zero mean AR(1) process, given by

i = ai-1 + i, i  i.i.d. N (0, 1),

(6)

where i is assumed to be independent of i, ui and i. Then, the process-specific impact of

the

latent

factor

is

given

by

ij

:= ji

with

ij

= ai-1,j

+ ji,

and

thus

dij di

> (<) 0

for

j > (<) 0 with j = 1, 2, 3. 7 Because of the symmetry of the distribution of i, the sign of

the individual parameters j are not identified. Hence, for instance, we cannot distinguish

between the cases 1 > 0, 2 < 0 versus 1 < 0, 2 > 0. Nevertheless, we can identify

whether the latent component influences the two components in the same direction or in

opposite directions. For that reason, we have to impose an identification assumption which

5We refer the specifications presented above explicitly to the processes i, Vi and i. However, generally, the proposed structure can be used for any kind of positive-valued random variable including e.g. bid-ask spreads or market depths.
6Note that the means of ui and i are unequal to one as long as m2, m3, p2, p3 = 1.
7Hence, in order to identify the j's, the latent variance Var[i] is normalized to one.

6

restricts the sign of one of the parameters j. Then, the signs of all other coefficients k with k = j are identified.

The process-specific components hi, i and i are assumed to follow a multivariate observation driven dynamic which is parameterized in terms of a VAR(MA) structure

PQ
µi =  + A0z0,i + Aj zi-j + Bj µi-j ,
j=1 j=1

(7)

where

µi := (ln hi, ln i, ln i),

z0,i := (0, ln Vi, ln i),

zi :=



|i| , hish,i

Vi isV,i

,

i is,i

= |i|e1i/2, uie2i , ie3i 

(8) (9)
(10)

as well as  = {k}, k = 1, 2, 3, denote (3 × 1) vectors, and A0 = {0kl} for k, l = 1, 2, 3 is a (3 × 3) triangular matrix where only the three upper right elements can be nonzero. Furthermore, Aj = {jkl} and Bj = {jkl} for k, l = 1, 2, 3 are (3 × 3) matrices of innovation and persistence parameters, respectively. The triangular structure of A0 reflects the imposed weak exogeneity assumptions underlying the decomposition of the joint density in (1). The log-linear form ensures the positiveness of the individual processes without imposing additional parameter restrictions. This property eases the estimation of the model particularly when A0 = 0 or when additional explanatory variables are included.
According to eq. (10) the process-specific dynamics in (7) are updated based on innovations zi corresponding to the lagged (de-meaned) returns, volumes and trading intensities, standardized by their corresponding observation driven components. We choose this specification because of four reasons: Firstly, using standardized (de-meaned) absolute returns, volumes and intensities as innovations is quite common in logarithmic multiplicative error specifications and ensures that the stationarity conditions of µi (given a) only depend on Bj. This form is chosen e.g. in logarithmic autoregressive conditional duration (Log-ACD) models (Bauwens and Giot, 2000, Bauwens, Galli, and Giot, 2003) or in exponential GARCH models (Nelson, 1991).8 Secondly, standardizing only by observation driven components ensures that the latter can be updated without requiring to integrate the latent factor out. As discussed in Section 4, this clearly eases the estimation of the model since the computation of µi does not depend on i. Thirdly, since the latent variable is not integrated out from the innovations, it is clear that the latter implicitly still depend on i (see (10)). Hence, a shock in the latent factor in period i influences {hi, i, i} not only in period i, but (through zi)

8The specification could be easily extended to allow for nonlinear news responses as e.g. discussed in the context of ACD models by Fernandes and Grammig (2006) or Hautsch (2006) or in the context of GARCH models by Engle and Ng (1993) or Hentschel (1995).

7

also in the following periods which causes (cross-)autocorrelations between the individual processes. Because of this effect, the common component can generate cross-dependencies between the observation driven processes hi, i and i even when A0 = Aj = 0. This will be illustrated in more detail in Section 3 and is an important model feature allowing to parsimoniously capture cross-dependencies. Fourth, with this specification, we implicitly assume that conditional expectations of market participants, given the latent factor, are updated based on the observable history in volatilities, volumes and intensities. Consequently, the dynamics in µi capture (cross-)autocorrelations between volatilities, volumes and intensities which are not driven by an underlying (information) component but are rather attributed to specific trading behavior.
In order to illustrate the structure of the model in more detail, assume for simplicity A0 = 0, P = Q = 1, sh,i = sV,i = s,i = 1, and diagonal parameterizations of A1 and B1. Then, the model is rewritten as

i = h~ii, Vi = ~ iui, i = ~ ii,

h~i = hie1i , ~ i = ie2i , ~ i = ie3i ,

(11) (12) (13)

where

ln h~i - 1i

=

1

+ 111

|i-1| hi-1

+ 111(ln h~i-1 - 1i-1),

ln ~ i

- 2i

=

2

+

122

Vi-1 i-1

+ 122(ln ~ i-1

- 2i-1),

ln ~ i

- 3i

=

3

+

133

Xi-1 i-1

+ 133(ln ~ i-1

- 3i-1).

(14) (15) (16)

Hence, it is evident that the latent component i can be interpreted as an additional re-

gressor which is statically included and is driven by its own dynamics according to (6).

The SMEM is an extension of the multiplicative error models of Engle (2002) and

Manganelli (2005). Whereas Manganelli (2005) assumes the process-specific innovations to

be contemporaneously uncorrelated, Cipollini, Engle, and Gallo (2007) address the problem

of specifying multivariate MEM's taking into account contemporaneous correlations between

the individual processes by means of copula-approaches. The multivariate SMEM proposed

in this paper can be seen as an alternative which captures contemporaneous correlations by

the inclusion of a common latent factor. The usefulness of the combination of observation

driven and parameter driven dynamics is also stressed by Blazsek and Escribano (2005)

who propose applying the stochastic conditional intensity model by Bauwens and Hautsch

(2006) to model the intensity of patent activities of firms. Koopman, Lucas, and Monteiro

(2005) introduce an extension of the model and apply it successfully to model credit rating

transitions.

8

We call the first component of the SMEM a stochastic GARCH (SGARCH) model, whereas the second and third component is referred to a stochastic ACD (SACD) model. These specifications nest several model classes. The SGARCH model encompasses a simple EGARCH specification as well as the stochastic volatility (SV) model proposed by Taylor (1986) and permits both competing models to be tested against each other. In particular, for 111 = 111 = 0, (14) can be rewritten as an SV model, while for 1 = 0 it resembles a simple form of the EGARCH model (however without news impact asymmetries) as introduced by Nelson (1991). Furthermore, for 111 = 0 and 111 = 0 it can be interpreted as an SV model that is mixed with a further random variable. Accordingly, the SACD model as specified in (15) and (16) nests the SCD model (Bauwens and Veredas, 2004) for 122 = 122 = 0 and 133 = 133 = 0, respectively, the Log-ACD model (Bauwens and Giot, 2000) for 2 = 0 and 3 = 0, respectively, and, correspondingly, a mixed SCD model for 122 = 0, 122 = 0 and 133 = 0, 133 = 0, respectively.
In the univariate case, the SMEM corresponds to a two-factor model which might allow to capture dynamics not only in first conditional moments but also in higher order conditional moments. In this sense, the SMEM could serve as an interesting alternative to the stochastic volatility duration model by Ghysels, Gouri´eroux, and Jasiak (2004). More detailed comparisons of both approaches are clear issues for further research.
3 Statistical Properties of the Model
The dynamic stability of the SMEM is ensured by the stability of the two underlying dynamic components. The strict stationarity of i is guaranteed by |a| < 1. In this case, the innovations of the observation driven dynamics, zi, consist of products of i.i.d. variates and strictly stationary variables and thus are themselves strictly stationary. Then, the stability of the observation driven VAR(MA) dynamic characterized by (7) to (10) is ensured by the eigenvalues of the characteristic equation implied by Bj, j = 1, . . . , Q, lying inside the unit circle.
The inclusion of the latent component in the model renders the analytical computation of unconditional moments and (cross-)autocorrelation functions generally relatively difficult. In the following, we analyze the statistical properties of the model based on several simulation studies. For different specifications of the SMEM, we generate 100 sets of 50, 000 observations and analyze the distributional and dynamical properties. Tables 1 and 29 show the mean, standard deviation, minimum, maximum, kurtosis, selected quantiles as well as the Ljung and Box (1978) statistic for (univariate) SGARCH and SACD processes under dif-
9All tables and figures are shown in the Appendix.
9

ferent parameterizations.10 Table 1 illustrates that the inclusion of a latent component has a strong influence on the standard deviation, the kurtosis as well as the serial dependence in the second moments of the simulated return process. We observe that processes generated by high parameter values of a and 1 imply a high unconditional variance, overkurtosis, fat tails as well as a strong serial dependence in the conditional variance. Because of its mixture structure, the SGARCH process allows for a high distributional and dynamical flexibility and captures the well known statistical properties of typical financial return series.
Similar findings are revealed for simulated SACD processes (Table 2). Again, an increase of the latent parameters a and 3 leads to a significant rise of the unconditional variance as well as of the autocorrelations of the resulting process. As for SGARCH processes, it is apparent that a high serial dependence in both the observation driven component and the parameter driven component generate distributions with strong fat tail behavior. These effects are even amplified when the Weibull parameter p3 is larger than one.
Below we study the dynamic properties of multivariate SMEM's. Because of brevity we concentrate mainly on the impact of the common latent factor on the dynamic properties of the multivariate process, whereas the influence of the observation driven VARMA component is of less interest. Figures 1 to 6 show the autocorrelation and cross-autocorrelation functions implied by a two-dimensional SMEM(1,1) for the volatility and the intensity process.11 Figures 1 to 3 show SMEM processes where the latent factor is strongly (positively) autocorrelated (a = 0.9). Moreover, we impose diagonal specifications of A1 and B1 implying no (direct) dependencies between hi and i and assume the autocorrelations of the processes hi and i to be only quite weak (1ii = 1ii = 0.1 for i = 1, 3). Nevertheless, we observe that the existence of the latent factor causes distinct autocorrelations in hi and i as well as in Yi2 and i. As described in Section 2, this is caused by the fact that hi and i are updated by innovations zi-1 which jointly depend on an autocorrelated common component i-1 (recall eq. (10)). This induces significant serial dependencies in {hi, i, Yi2, i} even for values of A1 and B1 close to zero. Similarly, the latent factor causes also distinct cross-autocorrelations between both hi and i as well as between Yi2 and i even for diagonal specifications of A1 and B1. Clearly, the magnitude of the (cross-)autocorrelations rises with the parameters 1 and 3 as well as with the persistence of the latent process as driven by a. These illustrations show that a persistent latent component can be the major source of the observed cross-dependencies in the multivariate process. This is one of the main features of the model.
10Since the distribution of returns under a SGARCH process is symmetric and the mean is set to zero, only the quantiles of the right tail of the distribution are shown.
11Since the volume component is parameterized similarly, it reveals the same properties and same interactions with the other processes. For this reason, we refrain from showing the results for the corresponding three-dimensional processes.
10

Figure 3 shows the effect of the parameters 1 and 3 having opposite signs. Since a, A1 and B1 are unchanged the autocorrelations in {hi, i, Yi2, i} are identical to those shown in Figure 2. However, since the latent factor influences the two processes in opposite directions, we observe negative CACF's between hi and i as well as between Yi2 and i. Hence, it is shown that under certain parameter constellations, the latent factor can cause positive serial dependencies in Yi2 and i while simultaneously inducing negative cross-autocorrelations between the two processes.
In contrast, Figures 4 and 5 show SMEM processes where the observation driven dynamics themselves also reveal distinct cross-dependencies. In Figure 4, i is set to zero, whereas in Figure 5, i follows a persistent process with a = 0.9 and 1 = 3 = 0.1. Comparing both figures demonstrates that the inclusion of the latent factor in Figure 5 induces a significant rise of the ACF of hi and i, and of the CACF between Yi2 and i.12 Hence, if the latent factor is sufficiently strong, it can completely overlay and dominate the multivariate dynamics. Clearly, the strength of this effect depends on the process-specific impacts d1 and d3.
Finally, Figure 6 illustrates the effects when the latent factor reveals no serial dependence at all (a = 0), however, a strong impact on the individual components (1 = 3 = 1). Then, the complete process is effectively overlaid by a white noise variable which clearly reduces the persistence in hi, i, Yi2 and i and drives the cross-autocorrelations toward zero.
Summarizing, we observe that the SMEM is able to capture a wide range of multivariate dynamics arising either from a common underlying component and/or idiosyncratic observation driven dependencies. Most importantly, it is illustrated that the existence of a persistent common latent factor can be the source of distinct (cross-)autocorrelations and contemporaneous correlations in the multivariate process even when there are no (or weak) multivariate observation driven dynamics. This reflects the idea that an underlying component can be indeed the major driving force for the observed serial (cross-)dependencies in multivariate trading processes. This will be empirically tested in Section 5.
4 Statistical Inference
Let W denote the data matrix with Wi := {wj}ij=1 and let  denote the vector of parameters of the SMEM. The conditional likelihood given the realizations of the latent variable i is
12The asymmetric cross-autocorrelations between Yi2 and i are caused by the fact that the return innovation i is driven by the square root of hi, whereas i is driven by i itself.
11

given by where

n
L(W ; |n) =
i=1

1 2h~i

exp

-

i2 2h~ i

p2Vip2m2-1 (m2)~ pi 2m2

exp

-

Vi ~ i

p2

×

p3pi 3m3-1 (m3)~ pi 3m3

exp

-

i ~ i

p3
,

(17)

h~i = hie1i sh,i, ~ i = ie2i sV,i, ~ i = e3s,i.

Since the latent process is not observable, the conditional likelihood function must be integrated with respect to i using the assumed normal distribution of the latter. Hence, the integrated log likelihood function is given by

L(W ; ) =

n i=1

1 exp 2h~i

-

i2 2h~ i

p2Vip2m2-1 (m2)~ pi 2m2

exp

-

Vi ~ i

p2

×

p3pi 3m3-1 (m3)~ pi 3m3

exp

-

i ~ i

p3

1 exp 2

-

1 2

(i

-

µ0,i)2

d

nn

= g(wi|i, Wi-1; )p(i|i-1; )d = f (wi, i|Wi-1, i-1; )d,

i=1 i=1

(18)

where µ0,i := E[i|i-1], g(·) denotes the conditional density of wi given (i, Wi-1) and p(·) denotes the conditional density of i given i-1. The computation of the n-dimensional integral in (18) is performed numerically using the efficient importance sampling (EIS) method proposed by Richard and Zhang (2005). This algorithm was shown to work quite well in the context of the class of latent factor models (see e.g. Liesenfeld and Richard, 2003 or, Bauwens and Hautsch, 2006).
To implement the EIS algorithm, the integral (18) is rewritten as

L(W ; ) =

n i=1

f (wi, i|Wi-1, i-1; m(i|i-1, i)

)

n i=1

m(i|i-1,

i)d,

(19)

where {m(i|i-1, i)}in=1 denotes a sequence of auxiliary importance samplers indexed by auxiliary parameters i. Then, the importance sampling estimate of the likelihood is

obtained by

L(W ; )



L^R(W ; )

=

1 R

R r=1

n i=1

f

(wi, i(r)(i)|Wi-1, (i-r)1(i-1); m(i(r)(i)|i(-r)1(i-1), i)

)

,

(20)

where {i(r)(i)}in=1 denotes a trajectory of random draws from the sequence of auxiliary importance samplers m and R such trajectories are generated.

12

The idea of the EIS approach is to choose a sequence of samplers for m(i|i-1, i)
that exploits the sample information on the i's revealed by the observable data. As
shown by Richard and Zhang (2005), the EIS principle is to choose the auxiliary parameters {i}in=1 in a way that provides a good match between in=1m(i|i-1, i) and ni=1f (wi, i|Wi-1, i-1; ) in order to minimize the Monte Carlo sampling variance of L^R(W ; ). Richard and Zhang (2005) illustrate that the resulting high-dimensional mini-
mization problem can be split up into solvable low-dimensional subproblems. This makes

the approach tractable even for very high dimensions. The detailed EIS procedure is de-

scribed in the appendix.

An important advantage which facilitates the computation of the function f (·) is the

fact that the time series recursion of the observation driven components hi, i and i can be computed without the need of knowing the latent factor. As discussed in Section 2 this

is due the fact that {hi, i, i} are driven based on innovations zi which are observable given the history of {i, Vi, i} and {hi, i, i}. Then, hi, i and i can be computed in a first step according to the VARMA structure given by (7) to (10) and can be used in a second step to evaluate the sampler {m(i|i-1, i}in=1.
Filtered estimates of functions of an arbitrary function of i, (i), given the observable information set up to ti-1 are given by

E [(i) |Wi-1 ] =

(i)p(i

|Wi-1, i-1, )f (Wi-1, i-1|)di f (Wi-1, i-1|)di-1

.

(21)

The integral in the denominator corresponds to the marginal likelihood function of the

first i - 1 observations, L(Wi-1; ), and can be evaluated on the basis of the sequence of auxiliary samplers {m(j|j-1, ^ji-1)}ij-=11 where {^ji-1} denotes the value of the EIS auxiliary parameters associated with the computation of L(Wi-1; ) and  is set equal to its
corresponding maximum likelihood estimate. Correspondingly, the numerator is computed

by



1 R

R r=1

 


i(r)()

 i-1 f

j=1

wj , j(r)(^ji-1)|Wj-1, j(r-)1(^ji--11),  m (jr)(^ji-1)|j(r-)1(^ij--11), ^ij-1


 ,


(22)

where {j(r)(^ji-1)}ij-=11 denotes a trajectory drawn from the sequence of importance samplers associated with L(Wi-1; ), and (ir)() is a random draw from the conditional density p(i|Wi-1, (i-r)1(^ii--11), ). The computation of the sequence of filtered estimates
E [(i) |Wi-1 ], i = 1, . . . , n, requires to rerun the EIS algorithm for every i (=1 to n).

13

Then, the filtered residuals are given by

^i =

^i h^iE [e1i |Wi-1 ] s^h,i

u^i

=

Vi ^ iE [e2i |Wi-1 ] s^V,i

^i

=

^ i

E

i [e3i |Wi-1

]

s^,i

.

(23)
(24) (25)

5 Empirical Results

5.1 Data and Descriptive Statistics

The empirical study uses transaction data from the AOL, Boeing, IBM and JP Morgan stock traded at the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE). The data is extracted from the Trade and Quote (TAQ) database released by the NYSE and covers a period over five months between 02/01/2001 and 31/05/2001.
We choose an aggregation level of five minutes as a trade-off between utilizing a maximum amount of intraday information on the one hand, ending up with tractable sample sizes on the other hand and, in addition, reducing the influence of too much noise induced by market microstructure effects (like effects due to price-discreteness, split-transactions, liquidity induced price impacts or the irregular spacing in time). Consequently, the resulting time series consist of 8, 008 observations of five minutes log midquote returns, the average five minutes trading volume per transaction and the number of trades occurring in each interval. Table 3 shows the mean, standard deviation, minimum, maximum, different quantiles, kurtosis as well as univariate and multivariate Ljung-Box statistics associated with the individual time series. The latter is computed according to Hosking (1980) and is given by

M LB(s)

:=

n(n

+

2)

s j=1

n

1 -

j

trace

C^j C^0-1C^j C^0-1

 2ks,

where k = 3 denotes the dimension of the process, s the number of lags taken into account, and C^j is the jth residual autocovariance matrix.13 The quite high Ljung-Box statistics in Table 3 indicate that the five minutes trading data reveal strong serial (cross-)dependencies.
Since we are not particularly interested in the conditional mean function of returns, we reduce the complexity of the model by estimating i in a separate step as the residuals of an ARMA(1,1) process for the Yi series.14 In a next step, we estimate the intraday seasonality

13For k = 1, the multivariate Ljung-Box statistic reduces to the well known univariate one.
14However, since for all return series the ARMA component is very close to zero, and thus i is very similar to Yi, we refrain from showing the estimates here.

14

components sh,i, sV,i, s,i. A simultaneous estimation of seasonality effects in the SMEM is theoretically possible, however, considerably increases the computational burden because of the high number of parameters. For this reason, we exploit the multiplicative structure in (3)-(5) and estimate sh,i, sV,i, s,i in a separate step on the basis of cubic spline functions using 30 minutes nodes.15 Finally, we use i/ s^h,i, Vi/s^V,i and i/s^,i to estimate the SMEM.16
Figures 7 through 10 show the empirical autocorrelation and cross-autocorrelation functions of Yi2, Vi, and i as well as Yi2/s^h,i, Vi/s^V,i, and i/s^,i. It turns out that all processes reveal significantly positive autocorrelations with a relatively high persistence. The highest serial dependence is observed for volumes and trading intensities, whereas for the volatility process lower autocorrelations are found. Moreover, significantly positive crossautocorrelations between the return volatility and the trading volume are observed whereas the interdependencies between the volatility and the trading intensity are only very weak. In contrast, significantly negative cross-autocorrelations between the trading volume and the trading intensity are found. Hence, obviously, higher volumes enter the market with a lower speed.
5.2 Estimation Results for Univariate SMEM's
Tables 4 to 6 show the estimation results of univariate SGARCH as well as SACD models for five minutes volatilities, trading volumes and trading intensities for the four stocks. To restrict the computational effort, we restrict the class of considered models to specifications with a maximal lag order of two. For all processes and all stocks, we find significant evidence for the existence of a persistent latent component. As revealed by the estimates of the parameter a, the strongest serial dependence in the latent component is observed for the volatility and trading intensity processes, whereas it is lower for trading volumes. It turns out that both the parameter driven dynamic as well as the observation driven dynamic interact. In particular, a declines when observation driven dynamics are included. Accordingly, in the observation driven component, the innovation parameter declines and the persistence parameter is driven toward one when the latent factor is taken into account. Hence, news enter the model primarily through the latent component, which is in line with the idea that the underlying factor serves as a proxy for the unobserved information process. Furthermore, it is shown that the inclusion of the latent component increases the goodness-of-fit as well as the dynamical properties of the model. Actually, for the volatility
15The component sh,i is estimated based on squared log returns. 16The resulting estimates of sh,i, sV,i, s,i reveal the well-known U-shape pattern which is typically found in intraday trading variables. For reasons of brevity we do not include them in the paper but they are available upon request from the author.
15

and the volume processes, a pure parameter driven dynamic in form of a SV or SCD specification, respectively (column (3)), outperforms a pure observation driven dynamic in form of an EGARCH or Log-ACD specification, respectively (column (2)). Nevertheless, we observe that neither the parameter driven component nor the observation driven component can be rejected. Hence, for nearly all time series, the best goodness-of-fit is obtained by specifications (4) or (5) which include both types of dynamics. This result illustrates that the dynamics in volatilities, volumes and trading intensities are not sufficiently captured by a one-factor model but rather by a two-factor model. This observation is in line with the findings by Ghysels, Gouri´eroux, and Jasiak (2004) on the basis of a stochastic volatility duration model.
5.3 Estimation Results for Multivariate SMEM's
Tables 7 to 10 give the estimation results for multivariate SMEM's including all three trading components. In order to identify the sign of the parameters j, we restrict 1 to be positive. As in the univariate models, we ensure model parsimony by restricting the maximal lag order to two. In addition, we restrict A2 and B2 to be diagonal matrices. The major findings can be summarized as following:
(i) We find significant evidence for the existence of a latent common component with an autoregressive parameter which is on average around a^  0.94. Hence, common shocks are relatively persistent over time which is in accordance with corresponding results based on daily data (see e.g. Bollerslev and Jubinski, 1999). Obviously, the latent factor seems to capture common long-run dependence which is not easily covered even by highly parameterized observation driven dynamics. This result is surprisingly robust over all individual specifications and is clearly in line with the notion of a joint underlying information process. Hence, our results provide evidence that such a process is identifiable not only based on daily data but also based on intraday data.
(ii) The estimated parameters 1, 2 and 3 are significantly positive indicating that a latent shock affects the volatility, the average trading volume and the trading intensity in the same direction. Interestingly, it turns out that the underlying joint component influences primarily the volatility and trade size, whereas its impact on the trading intensity is comparably weak.17 This finding illustrates that the common factor mainly drives the well-known volatility-volume relation confirming the corresponding findings for daily data. It also shows that volatility is primarily correlated with the average trade size rather than with the trading intensity. Hence, in contrast to the findings by Jones, Kaul, and Lipson (1994) we find that (unobserved) information is obviously stronger reflected in the average
17For the AOL stock it is even insignificant.
16

trade size rather than in the trading intensity. Consequently, the former should be a more reliable proxy for the existence of information than the latter.
(iii) The inclusion of the latent factor leads to a significant decline of the magnitude of the parameters 012 and 013. This indicates that the conditional contemporaneous correlations between i2 and Vi as well as between i2 and i given i are lower than the corresponding unconditional correlations. Hence, a significant fraction of the contemporaneous relations between the conditional return variance and the average trade size as well as the trading intensity actually do arise because of the existence of a common component. Nevertheless, the fact that the joint factor does not fully explain the contemporaneous dependencies indicates that there exist relations between the individual variables which are not necessarily linked to a common information process but rather to trading effects. Actually, the latter might be attributed to the effects that a high liquidity demand associated with high volumes and fast trading leads to significant revisions in the best ask/bid quotes and thus to an increase in (midquote) return volatility.
In contrast, the parameter 023 is significantly negative and widely unaffected by the inclusion of the latent component. Consequently, we can conclude that the (negative) contemporaneous relation between trade size and trading intensity is not driven by a latent common component. Rather, we identify two opposite effects: Firstly, a positive contemporaneous correlation between trade size and trading intensity due to the existence of a common subordinated process which affects both processes in the same direction. Secondly, a negative conditional correlation given the latent factor, which is very robust and might be explained by the typical finding that high trading volumes absorb a non-trivial part of the offered liquidity supply. This induces a revision of the best bid/ask quote which makes trading more expensive and thus reduces traders' incentive for market order trading (see e.g. Foucault, 1999). Our results indicate that the latter is obviously not linked to a potential underlying information component.
(iv) The estimations omitting a common latent component (panels (1)-(3)) clearly reveal significant evidence for cross-dependencies between the volatilities, volumes and trading intensities. In particular, as indicated by a mostly positive parameter ^112, we observe a positive relation between innovations in the lagged trade size and the current volatility. Hence, higher than expected volumes imply significant quote revisions and consequently increase the subsequent volatility. As revealed by ^132 > 0, this effect is also accompanied by an increase of the trading intensity. In contrast, unexpected increases of the volatility reduce both the subsequent trade size and the trading intensity (^121 < 0 and ^131 < 0). This result is very much in line with theory (see e.g. Foucault, 1999), where a higher transitory volatility increases the spreads and thus makes trading more expensive which in turn reduces
17

the trade sizes and trading intensity. However, as shown in panels (5)-(7), the inclusion of i clearly reduces the magnitude
of the aforementioned cross-effects. In most cases, the latter become close to zero and/or insignificant. Similar effects are also observed for the non-diagonal elements in B1. This finding indicates that the latent common component indeed captures a substantial part of the cross-dependencies. Hence, most of the observed causalities between the individual variables are mainly due to the existence of a subordinated common (information) process jointly directing the individual components.18 This suggests the usefulness of more parsimonious parameterizations of the observation driven dynamics which might be mainly reduced to a diagonal specification of the autoregressive parameter matrices.
Moreover, the inclusion of the latent factor reduces the impact of the own process-specific innovations (^1ii and 2ii for i = 1, 2, 3) and increases the persistence in the observation driven dynamics. Hence, in accordance with the results for the univariate models, we find evidence that news enter the model primarily through the latent factor, whereas the impact of the process-specific innovations declines.
(v) In most cases, the specifications without latent factor (columns (1) to (3)) are not able to completely capture the dynamics of the system as indicated by highly significant Ljung-Box statistics for the residuals. Typically, the inclusion of the latent component improves the dynamic properties of the model. This is particularly true for the volatility and the volume component, whereas in some cases the dynamics in the trading intensity are still not completely captured by the model. The latter results are not surprising given that the latent factor's impact on the trading intensity is only very weak. Moreover, the inclusion of the latent factor leads to a reduction of the multivariate Ljung-Box statistic indicating that the latent component does a good job in capturing the multivariate dynamics and interdependencies between the individual processes. Furthermore, as revealed by the Bayes information criterion (BIC), the SMEM yields a clearly better goodness-of-fit compared to MEM's without a latent factor.
(vi) The worst performance is observed for specification (4), where any observation driven dynamics are omitted and only a parameter driven dynamic is included. Hence, a single common autoregressive component is not sufficient to completely capture the dynamics of the multivariate system which is in line with the findings by Andersen (1996) or Liesenfeld (1998). Therefore, as in the univariate models we can neither reject the parameter driven dynamic nor the observation driven dynamic. Actually, the best performance is
18A notable exception is the negative relation between past innovations in the volatility and the current average trade size as reflected by ^21 < 0. This relationship is obviously not information-driven and becomes even more pronounced when the latent factor is taken into account. This finding is not easily explained in the given setting and requires further investigations.
18

revealed by specifications which include both types of dynamics confirming the basic idea of the proposed model.
Our results are widely robust over the cross-section of stocks. A notable exception are the findings for the Boeing stock which deviate in several respects from those for the other stocks. Here, the latent factor is clearly less persistent and does not capture the dynamics of the processes very well.

5.4 Impulse Response Dynamics and Graphical Illustrations
In order to analyze the impact of shocks on the SME process, we rely on the concept of the generalized impulse response function (GIRF) introduced by Koop, Pesaran, and Potter (1996) which is given by

GIRFXi (s, , Fi-1) = E[Xi+s|i = , Fi-1] - E[Xi+s|Fi-1],

(26)

where Xi  {i, Yi2, Vi, i}, i  {i, i, ui, i},  is the magnitude of the shock, and s denotes the number of periods over which the GIRF is computed. As shown in this representation, the GIRF conditions on the shock and on the history of the process whereas innovations occurring in intermediate time periods are averaged out. Then, the GIRF can be interpreted as a random variable in terms of the history Fi-1. In nonlinear models, analytical expressions for the conditional expectations used in (26) are often not available and thus, Monte-Carlo simulation techniques have to be performed. Figures 11 to 14 show the generalized impulse response functions for a shock in the latent innovation i with magnitude of one standard deviation. The GIRF is computed by conditioning on the unconditional means E[Xi] and E[i] and is estimated by

GIRF Xi (s, , Fi-1) = E^ [Xi+s|i = 1, Fi-1] - E^ [Xi+s|Fi-1] ,

where the conditional expectations are estimated by sample averages based on 5, 000 simulated paths of Xi, Xi+1, . . . , Xi+h given the corresponding conditioning information and using the parameter estimates of specification (8) in Tables 7 to 10. For all processes, we observe a positive, persistent response of i2, Vi and i due to a shock in the latent component. In most cases, the impulse response function declines monotonically and approaches zero after around 30-40 lags corresponding to 150-200 minutes. Hence, common (information) shocks remain present in the trading process up to about 3 hours. In accordance with the parameter estimates, these effects are mostly pronounced for the volatility and trade size component but ­ not surprisingly ­ only quite weak for the trading intensity.
Figures 15 and 16 show the time series plots of the (filtered) estimates of exp(i), Yi2,

19

Vi and i for the AOL and IBM stock, respectively.19 It is illustrated that the latent factor captures common shocks in the volatility and volume component, whereas the intensity component is widely unaffected by co-movements. We observe that there are certain periods, where volatilities, volumes as well as the common factor move in lock-steps, whereas in other periods, the individual processes seem to be clearly disentangled. These results are confirmed by the correlations between the individual components as given by Corr[ei, i2] = 0.18 (= 0.22), Corr[ei, vi] = 0.52 (= 0.55) and Corr[ei, i] = -0.05 (= 0.01) for the AOL (IBM) stock.20 Hence, we observe significant commonalities between the latent factor and return volatility as well as the trade size but not necessarily with the trading intensity.
6 Conclusions
In this paper, we have proposed a new type of multivariate multiplicative error model for intraday trading processes. The basic idea of the so-called multivariate stochastic multiplicative error model (SMEM) is to combine a multivariate observation driven (multiplicative error) dynamic with an underlying univariate parameter driven factor which jointly affects all individual components of the system. Whereas the observation driven dynamic is updated by process-specific innovations which are completely observable given the process history, the parameter driven component follows an autoregressive process which is updated by unobservable innovations independent from the idiosyncratic errors. We propose the model as a tool to identify a common component in multivariate systems while still allowing for idiosyncratic dynamics. It is a computationally more tractable alternative to multiple latent factor models. Moreover, if there is a common component serving as a major source for cross-dependencies between the individual processes, then its explicit consideration should result in a more parsimonious specification of the multivariate process. This becomes even more important when the dimension of the process is very high.
The model was designed to allow for the possibility that intraday return volatility, the trade size as well as the trading intensity are driven not only by their own history but also by a joint dynamic latent factor capturing the (unobservable) information process. Applying the model to five minutes data of four blue chip stocks traded at the NYSE leads to the following conclusions: (i) There is significant evidence for the existence of a common unobservable component following persistent dynamics and jointly driving the trading process. This finding clearly confirms the notion that underlying common dynamics are not only identifiable based on a daily level but also on an intradaily level and thus provides
19For sake of brevity, the corresponding plots for the two other stocks are not shown, but are available upon request from the author.
20For the other stocks the correlation structures look quite similar.
20

evidence for a "micro-foundation" of the well-known volume-volatility relationship. (ii) Confirming the results based on daily data (see e.g. Tauchen and Pitts, 1983, or Bollerslev and Jubinski, 1999) the latent factor mostly affects the volatility and trade size but has an only very weak impact on the trading intensity. Consequently, we conclude that the trade size seems to be a more reliable proxy for common information shocks than the trading intensity which is in contrast to the results by Jones, Kaul, and Lipson (1994). (iii) Most causal relations between volatility, trade size and trading intensity are significantly driven by the common component. "True" causalities not arising from common information shocks but rather from mechanisms of trading are still identifiable but typically only very weak. (iv) Even under the presence of a common dynamic factor, it is necessary to allow for process-specific dynamics. This suggests that a single latent component is not sufficient to capture the dynamics of the multivariate system and that common (information) shocks are processed in individual ways. (v) In univariate specifications of the individual trading components SMEM's significantly outperform models without a latent factor. This finding strongly suggests the need for flexible two-factor models and complements the findings by Ghysels, Gouri´eroux, and Jasiak (2004).
The LF-MEM is economically motivated by the idea that trading activity is driven by (i) an underlying information component and (ii) idiosyncratic, process-specific dynamics. This structure can be considered to be a reduced form representation of trading processes arising from asymmetric information based market microstructure theory (see e.g. Easley and O`Hara, 1992, or Easley, Kiefer, O`Hara, and Paperman, 1996, among others). The latter assumes that the trading process is driven by the interactions between informed market participants who can observe the underlying information process and uninformed agents who infer the true value of the traded asset by observing the trading history. Under this assumption, the common parameter driven component serves as a proxy for the unobserved information process whereas the process-specific observation driven dynamics result from the fact that common (observable) shocks are processed in different ways in volatility, trade size and trading intensity.
Our results provide evidence that a substantial part of the cross-dependencies between the individual processes can be captured a common dynamic component. This should open up the possibility to specify high-dimensional trading processes in a more parsimonious way. Future research is devoted to more extensive applications of the model. On the one hand, it might be interesting to analyze the performance of the model when even more dimensions, such as bid-ask spreads or market depths are added. We expect that the importance of the common component in such a setting becomes even stronger. Important applications of such a model will be the prediction of liquidity and trading costs over short
21

intraday time horizons. Here, the expected trading intensity, market depth, bid-ask spread as well as return volatility will be important determinants of expected trading costs and associated risks. The latter are important inputs to generate automated trading-costsminimizing trading algorithms as more and more heavily used in the financial industry. Moreover, we also plan to confront the model with observable news announcements as an additional component. This should shed some light on the question which obviously missing information is captured by the latent factor and how observable as well as unobservable information interact and jointly drive the trading process. This should lead to a deeper understanding of how information is processed and how this depends on the state of the market and the institutional environment of the market. Such information might helpful to optimize trading structures as well as corresponding trading models.
References
Admati, A., and P. Pfleiderer (1988): "A Theory of Intraday Patterns: Volume and Price Variability," Review of Financial Studies, 1, 3­40.
Andersen, T. G. (1996): "Return Volatility and Trading Volume: An Information Flow Interpretation of Stochastic Volatility," Journal of Finance, 51, 169­204.
Bauwens, L., F. Galli, and P. Giot (2003): "The Moments of Log-ACD Models," Discussion Paper 2003/11, CORE, Universit´e Catholique de Louvain.
Bauwens, L., and P. Giot (2000): "The Logarithmic ACD Model: An Application to the Bid/Ask Quote Process of two NYSE Stocks," Annales d'Economie et de Statistique, 60, 117­149.
(2001): Econometric Modelling of Stock Market Intraday Activity. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, Dordrecht, London.
Bauwens, L., and N. Hautsch (2006): "Modelling Financial High Frequency Data Using Point Processes," Discussion Paper, 2006-80, CORE, Universit´e Catholique de Louvain.
Bauwens, L., and D. Veredas (2004): "The Stochastic Conditional Duration Model: A Latent Factor Model for the Analysis of Financial Durations," Journal of Econometrics, 119, 381­412.
Blazsek, S., and A. Escribano (2005): "Dynamic Latent Factor Intensity Models of Knowledge Spillovers: Evidence Based on Patent Analysis," Working Paper Universidad Carlos III de Madrid.
22

Blume, L., D. Easley, and M. O`Hara (1994): "Market Statistics and Technical Analysis," Journal of Finance, 49 (1), 153­181.
Bollerslev, T., and D. Jubinski (1999): "Equity Trading Volume and Volatility: Latent Information Arrivals and Common Long-Run Dependencies," Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 17, 9­21.
Bowsher, C. G. (2006): "Modelling Security Markets in Continuous Time: Intensity based, Multivariate Point Process Models," Journal of Econometrics, forthcoming.
Chan, K., and W. Fong (2000): "Trade Size, Order Imbalance, and the Volatility-Volume Relation," Journal of Financial Economics, 57, 247­273.
Cipollini, F., R. F. Engle, and G. M. Gallo (2007): "Vector Multiplicative Error Models: Representation and Inference," Mimeo, University of Firenze.
Clark, P. (1973): "A Subordinated Stochastic Process Model with Finite Variance for Speculative Prices," Econometrica, 41, 135­155.
Dufour, A., and R. F. Engle (2000): "Time and the Impact of a Trade," Journal of Finance, 55, 2467­2498.
Easley, D., N. M. Kiefer, M. O`Hara, and J. B. Paperman (1996): "Liquidity, Information and Infrequently Traded Stocks," Journal of Finance, 4.
Easley, D., and M. O`Hara (1992): "Time and Process of Security Price Adjustment," The Journal of Finance, 47, 577­605.
Engle, R. F. (2000): "The Econometrics of Ultra-High-Frequency Data," Econometrica, 68, 1, 1­22.
(2002): "New Frontiers for ARCH Models," Journal of Applied Econometrics, 17, 425­446.
Engle, R. F., and G. M. Gallo (2006): "A Multiple Indicators Model for Volatility Using Intra-Daily Data," Journal of Econometrics, 131, 3­27.
Engle, R. F., and V. K. Ng (1993): "Measuring and Testing the Impact of News on Volatility," Journal of Finance, 48, 1749­1778.
Epps, T. W., and M. L. Epps (1976): "The Stochastic Dependence of Security Price Changes and Transaction Volumes: Implications for the Mixture-of-Distributions Hypothesis," Econometrica, 44, 305­321.
23

Fernandes, M., and J. Grammig (2006): "A Family of Autoregressive Conditional Duration Models," Journal of Econometrics, 130, 1­23.
Foucault, T. (1999): "Order Flow Composition and Trading Costs in a Dynamic Limit Order Market," Journal of Financial Markets, 2, 99­134.
Ghysels, E., C. Gourie´roux, and J. Jasiak (2004): "Stochastic Volatility Duration Models," Journal of Econometrics, 119, 413­433.
Glosten, L. R., and P. R. Milgrom (1985): "Bid, Ask and Transaction Prices in a Specialist Market with Heterogeneously Informed Traders," Journal of Financial Economics, 14, 71­100.
Grammig, J., and M. Wellner (2002): "Modeling the Interdependence of Volatility and Inter-Transaction Duration Process," Journal of Econometrics, 106, 369­400.
Hasbrouck, J. (1991): "Measuring the Information Content of Stock Trades," Journal of Finance, 46, 179­207.
Hautsch, N. (2004): Modelling Irregularly Spaced Financial Data, vol. 539 of Lecture Notes in Economics and Mathematical Systems. Springer, Berlin.
(2006): "Testing the Conditional Mean Function of Autoregressive Conditional Duration Models," Discussion Paper 2006-06, Finance Research Unit, Department of Economics, University of Copenhagen.
Hentschel, L. (1995): "All in the Family: Nesting Symmetric and Asymmetric GARCH Models," Journal of Financial Economics, 39, 71­104.
Hosking, J. R. M. (1980): "The Multivariate Portmanteau Statistic," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 75, 602­608.
Huang, R. D., and R. W. Masulis (2003): "Trading Activity and Stock Price Volatility: Evidence from the London Stock Exchange," Journal of Empirical Finance, 10, 249­269.
Jones, C. M., G. Kaul, and M. L. Lipson (1994): "Information, Trading, and Volatility," Journal of Financial Economics, 36, 127­154.
Koop, G., M. H. Pesaran, and S. M. Potter (1996): "Impulse Response Analysis in Nonlinear Multivariate Models," Journal of Econometrics, 74, 119­174.
Koopman, S. J., A. Lucas, and A. Monteiro (2005): "The Multi-State Latent Factor Intensity Model for Credit Rating Transitions," Discussion Paper TI2005-071/4, Tinbergen Institute.
24

Lamoureux, C. G., and W. D. Lastrapes (1990): "Heteroskedasticity in Stock Return Data: Volume versus GARCH Effects," Journal of Finance, 45, 221­229.
Liesenfeld, R. (1998): "Dynamic Bivariate Mixture Models: Modeling the Behavior of Prices and Trading Volume," Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 16, 101­109.
(2001): "A Generalized Bivariate Mixture Model for Stock Price Volatility and Trading Volume," Journal of Econometrics, 104, 141­178.
Liesenfeld, R., and J.-F. Richard (2003): "Univariate and Multivariate Stochastic Volatility Models: Estimation and Diagnostics," Journal of Empirical Finance, 10, 505­ 531.
Ljung, G. M., and G. E. P. Box (1978): "On a Measure of Lack of Fit in Time Series Models," Biometrika, 65, 297­303.
Manganelli, S. (2005): "Duration, Volume and Volatility Impact of Trades," Journal of Financial Markets, 8, 377­399.
Meddahi, N., E. Renault, and B. Werker (2006): "GARCH and Irregularly Spaced Data," Economic Letters, 90, 200­204.
Nelson, D. (1991): "Conditional Heteroskedasticity in Asset Returns: A New Approach," Journal of Econometrics, 43, 227­251.
Renault, E., and B. J. Werker (2003): "Stochastic Volatility Models with Transaction Risk," Discussion paper, Tilburg Univeristy.
Richard, J.-F. (1998): "Efficient High-dimensional Monte Carlo Importance Sampling," Working Paper, University of Pittsburgh.
Richard, J.-F., and W. Zhang (2005): "Efficient High-Dimensional Importance Sampling," Working Paper Pittsburgh University.
Tauchen, G. E., and M. Pitts (1983): "The Price Variability-Volume Relationship on Speculative Markets," Econometrica, 51, 485­505.
Taylor, S. J. (1986): Modelling Financial Time Series. Wiley, New York.
Tran, D. T. (2006): "Relationship between Persistent and Erratic Volatility Factors and Trading Activity," Working Paper, Duke University.
Xu, X. E., and C. Wu (1999): "The Intraday Relation between Return Volatility, Transactions, and Volume," International Review of Economics and Finance, 8, 375­397.
25

Appendix
A Efficient Importance Sampling
To define the importance sampler itself let k(i, i) denote a density kernel for m(i|i-1, i), given by

where

k(i, i) = m(i|i-1, i)(i-1, i),

(27)

(i-1, i) = k(i, i)di

(28)

denotes the integrating constant. The implementation of EIS requires to select a class of density kernels k(·) for the auxiliary sampler m(·) which provide a good approximation to the product f (·)(·). As discussed by Richard and Zhang (2005), a convenient and efficient possibility is to use a parametric extension of the direct samplers, Gaussian distributions in this context. Since the function g(·) appearing in (18) is essentially a product of different exponential functions, we propose to approximate it by a normal density kernel

(i, ) = exp 1,ii + 2,i2i ,

(29)

which is itself an exponential function in terms of i based on the auxiliary parameters i = (1,i, 2,i). Exploiting the property that the product of normal densities is itself a normal density, we parameterize k(·) as

k(i, i) = p(i|i-1; )(i, i)

and can show that

where

k(i, i)  exp = exp

(1,i + µ0,i) i +

2,i

-

1 2

2i

-

1 2i2

(i

-

µi)2

exp

µi2 2i2

,

(30)

i2 =(1 - 22,i)-1, µi = (1,i + µ0,i) i2.

(31) (32)

Hence, the auxiliary sampler m(·) is a normal distribution with conditional mean µi and conditional variance i2. By omitting irrelevant multiplicative factors, we obtain the integrating constant as

(i-1, i) = exp

µi2 2i2

-

µ20,i 2

.

(33)

26

As shown by Richard and Zhang (2005), the Monte Carlo variance of L^R(W ; ) can be minimized by splitting the minimization problem into n minimization problems of the form

R
min ln f i,0, i r=1

wi, i(r)()|Wi-1, (i-r)1(),  ·  i(r)(), i+1()

-0,i - ln k i(r)(), i()

2
,

(34)

where 0,i is a constant and {i(r)()}ni=1 with i(r)() := i(r)(i()) denotes a trajectory of random draws from the sampler m with auxiliary parameters i() which themselves depend on the model parameters .
Then, in practice, the implementation of the ML-EIS estimator requires the following steps:

(i) Draw R trajectories of the latent factor {(ir)(i)}ni=1 using the direct sampler p(·).

(ii) For i : n  1 solve the least squares problem characterized by the (auxiliary) linear regression

D1(r,i) + D2(r,i) + D3(r,i) + D4(r,i) = 0,i + 1,ii(r)() + 2,i i(r)() 2 + i(r), r = 1, . . . , R,

where

D1(r,i)

=

-

1 2

ln hi + 1(ir)() + ln sh,i

- 2hish,i

i2 e1(ir)()

,

D2(r,i) = (p2m2 - 1) ln Vi - p2m2 ln i + 2p2m2(ir)() + ln sV,i -

D3(r,i) = (p3m3 - 1) ln i - p3m3 ln i + 3p3m3(ir)() + ln s,i - D4(r,i) = ln  (ir)(), i+1() ,

Vi isV,ie2(ir)()

p2
,

i isi e3i(r)()

p3
,

and i(r) denotes the regression error term. These problems are solved sequentially starting at i = n, under the initial condition (n, n+1) = 1 and ending at i = 1. Liesenfeld and Richard (2003) recommend to iterate the procedure about three to five times to improve the efficiency of the approximations.

(iii) Compute the EIS sampler {m(i|i-1, ^(^)}in=1 on the basis of the conditional mean and variance as given by

i2 =(1 - 22,i)-1, µi = (1,i + µ0,i) i2.

(35) (36)

27

in order to draw R trajectories {(ir)(^i(^))}in=1. These trajectories are used to calculate the likelihood according to (20). Then, as suggested by Richard and Zhang (2005), the variance-covariance matrix of the estimated parameters is straightforwardly estimated based on the inverted Hessian.
28

B.1 Simulation Results
B.1.1 Simulated Distributions of SGARCH and SACD Processes

Table 1: Summary statistics of simulated SGARCH processes with P = Q = 1. The simulations are based
on 100 sets of 50, 000 observations. Evaluated statistics: Standard deviation, maximum, 75%-, 90%-, 95%-, 99%-quantile and kurtosis of the simulated return process as well as the Ljung-Box statistic (associated with 20 lags) for squared returns. The mean return is set to zero.

1 1111 a 1
S.D. Max quant75 quant90 quant95 quant99 Kurtosis LB(20)

(1)
0.000 0.100 0.100 0.000 0.000
1.046 4.472 0.705 1.340 1.721 2.435 3.010 109.027

(2)
0.000 0.100 0.100 0.100 0.100
1.049 4.539 0.705 1.341 1.725 2.454 3.046 112.222

(3) (4) (5)

Parameterization

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.100

0.100

0.100

0.100

0.100

0.100

0.500

0.900

0.900

0.100

0.100

0.200

Summary Statistics

1.050

1.062

1.109

4.539

5.016

6.477

0.704

0.702

0.695

1.342

1.346

1.368

1.726

1.743

1.809

2.454

2.515

2.741

3.055

3.194

3.798

122.304

384.497 2277.973

(6)
0.000 0.100 0.100 0.900 0.300
1.195 9.556 0.684 1.406 1.918 3.116 5.209 6131.453

(7)
0.000 0.100 0.700 0.900 0.300
1.341 11.944
0.751 1.557 2.141 3.533 5.812 9835.528

(8)
0.000 0.100 0.900 0.500 0.500
1.673 11.615
0.997 2.012 2.706 4.255 4.488 1706.835

1 1111 a 1
S.D. Max quant75 quant90 quant95 quant99 Kurtosis LB(20)

(9)
0.000 0.100 0.900 0.100 0.500
1.617 9.999 0.999 1.980 2.634 4.036 3.974 648.889

(10)
0.000 0.100 0.950 0.100 0.500
2.457 15.461
1.507 2.996 3.995 6.158 4.077 1422.047

(11) (12) (13)

Parameterization

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.100

0.100

0.100

0.950

0.950

0.950

0.500

0.700

0.900

0.500

0.300

0.300

Summary Statistics

2.554

2.416

2.978

18.572

15.064

37.967

1.509

1.499

1.497

3.053

2.961

3.226

4.126

3.928

4.581

6.558

6.014

8.137

4.658

3.961

10.995

2974.460 3837.337 29423.516

(14)
0.000 0.100 0.950 0.900 0.500
6.860 330.067
1.536 4.026 6.544 15.854 692.717 37688.351

(15)
0.000 0.200 0.700 0.900 0.500
3.206 181.854
0.836 2.078 3.255 7.237 1422.349 18684.144

(16)
0.000 0.500 0.500 0.900 0.500
48.175 6993.980
0.949 2.518 4.202 11.448 15327.022 3758.646

29

Table 2: Summary statistics of simulated SACD processes with P = Q = 1. The simulations are based on
100 sets of 50, 000 observations. Evaluated statistics: Mean, standard deviation, maximum, minimum, 1%-, 5%-, 10%-, 25%-, 50%-, 75%-, 90%-, 95%-, 99%-quantile as well as the Ljung-Box statistic (associated with 20 lags) of i.

3 1313 p3 m3 a 3
Mean S.D. Max Min quant01 quant05 quant10 quant25 quant50 quant75 quant90 quant95 quant99 LB(20)

(1)
0.000 0.100 0.100 1.000 1.000 0.000 0.000
1.124 1.138 14.371 0.000 0.011 0.057 0.117 0.320 0.773 1.552 2.591 3.387 5.255 615.291

(2)
0.000 0.100 0.100 1.000 1.000 0.100 0.100
1.131 1.158 15.559 0.000 0.011 0.057 0.117 0.319 0.774 1.559 2.611 3.421 5.359 648.092

(3) (4) (5)

Parameterization

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.100

0.100

0.100

0.100

0.100

0.100

1.000

1.000

1.000

1.000

1.000

1.000

0.500

0.900

0.900

0.100

0.100

0.200

Summary Statistics

1.133

1.167

1.310

1.166

1.267

1.846

15.732

21.927

90.964

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.011

0.011

0.010

0.057

0.056

0.051

0.117

0.115

0.106

0.319

0.314

0.296

0.772

0.769

0.755

1.558

1.577

1.651

2.617

2.709

3.076

3.436

3.618

4.357

5.399

5.920

8.192

751.600 2203.408 10739.092

(6)
0.000 0.100 0.700 1.000 1.000 0.900 0.200
1.795 3.095 185.843 0.000 0.012 0.063 0.130 0.368 0.953 2.144 4.161 6.103 12.530 26168.753

(7)
0.000 0.100 0.900 1.000 1.000 0.500 0.500
4.585 14.255 1689.343
0.000 0.025 0.130 0.272 0.782 2.105 5.029 10.433 16.006 36.328 22413.452

(8)
0.000 0.100 0.900 1.000 1.000 0.100 0.500
3.771 6.032 327.620 0.000 0.026 0.135 0.280 0.791 2.052 4.627 8.915 12.908 25.277 10965.638

(9)

3 0.000

1331

0.100 0.950

p3 1.000

m3 1.000

a 0.700

3 0.300

Mean S.D. Max Min quant01 quant05 quant10 quant25 quant50 quant75 quant90 quant95 quant99 LB(20)

11.946 24.246 1494.324
0.000 0.071 0.365 0.760 2.170 5.753 13.495 27.540 41.859 93.118 49335.797

(10)
0.000 0.100 0.950 1.000 1.000 0.100 0.500
12.470 20.691 959.318
0.000 0.078 0.402 0.837 2.387 6.328 14.716 29.405 43.777 91.284 26192.140

(11) (12) (13)

Parameterization

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.100

0.200

0.500

0.950

0.700

0.500

1.000

1.000

1.000

1.000

1.000

1.000

0.100

0.100

0.500

0.300

0.300

0.300

Summary Statistics

9.145

2.239

6.210

11.628

2.939

75.995

292.183

123.230 6500.553

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.073

0.018

0.022

0.374

0.094

0.117

0.773

0.194

0.242

2.158

0.539

0.683

5.445

1.350

1.808

11.748

2.879

4.335

21.505

5.208

9.519

30.103

7.253

15.926

54.793

13.248

55.442

19098.324 8604.206

255.547

(14)
0.000 0.100 0.700 0.800 1.200 0.900 0.200
1.794 3.129 206.091 0.000 0.012 0.063 0.131 0.368 0.953 2.146 4.159 6.091 12.537 25235.396

(15)
0.000 0.100 0.700 1.500 0.500 0.900 0.200
1.806 3.614 314.030 0.000 0.012 0.063 0.131 0.369 0.955 2.153 4.182 6.128 12.607 25247.540

(16)
0.000 0.100 0.700 5.000 0.500 0.900 0.200
1.788 3.035 175.815 0.000 0.012 0.063 0.130 0.367 0.950 2.140 4.150 6.074 12.451 26940.587

30

B.1.2 Autocorrelation and Cross-Autocorrelation Functions of Simulated Bivariate SMEM Processes
The following figures show autocorrelation functions (ACF) and cross-autocorrelation functions (CACF) implied by bivariate SMEM(1,1) processes for the return volatility and the trading intensity. The model is specified as a two-dimensional version of the processes as given by (1) through (10) with sh,i = sV,i = s,i = 1. From left to right: ACF of i, ACF's of hi (solid line) and i (broken line), ACF's of Yi2 (solid line) and i (broken line), CACF's of Yi2 and i (solid line) as well as of hi and i (broken line). The CACF graphs show the plot of Corr(x1,i, x2,i-j ) versus j for x1,i  {Yi2, hi} and x2,i  {i, i}. The conditional mean return is set to zero. The simulations are based on 100 sets of 50, 000 observations.
Figure 1:  = (0, 0), 013 = 0, A1 = (0.1 0, 0 0.1), B1 = (0.1 0, 0 0.1), a = 0.9, 1 = 3 = 0.1.
Figure 2:  = (0, 0), 013 = 0, A1 = (0.1 0, 0 0.1), B1 = (0.1 0, 0 0.1), a = 0.9, 1 = 3 = 0.3.
Figure 3:  = (0, 0), 013 = 0, A1 = (0.1 0, 0 0.1), B1 = (0.1 0, 0 0.1), a = 0.9, 1 = 0.3, 3 = -0.3.
Figure 4:  = (0, 0), 013 = 0.1, A1 = (0.1 0.1, 0.1 0.1), B1 = (0.7 0.2, 0.2 0.7), a = 0, 1 = 3 = 0.
31

Figure 5:  = (0, 0), 013 = 0.1, A1 = (0.1 0.1, 0.1 0.1), B1 = (0.7 0.2, 0.2 0.7), a = 0.9, 1 = 3 = 0.1. Figure 6:  = (-0.2, -0.2), 013 = 0.1, A1 = (0.1 0.1, 0.1 0.1), B1 = (0.7 0.2, 0.2 0.7), a = 0, 1 = 3 = 1.0.
32

B.2 Descriptive Statistics

Table 3: Descriptive statistics of log returns (multiplied by 100), squared log returns, average volumes per
trade as well as the number of transactions based on five minutes intervals for the AOL, Boeing, JP Morgan, and IBM stocks traded at the NYSE. Extracted from the 2001 TAQ data base. Sample period 02/01/01 to 31/05/01. The following descriptive statistics are shown: Number of observations, mean, standard deviation, minimum, maximum, 5%-, 10%-, 50%-, 90%-, as well as 95%-quantile, kurtosis, univariate and multivariate Ljung-Box statistic (computed for squared log returns, volumes and number of trades) associated with 20 lags.

Obs Mean S.D. Min Max q05 q10 q50 q90 q95 Kurtosis LB(20)
MLB(20)

Returns
8008 0.005 0.378 -2.973 3.000 -0.556 -0.404 0.000 0.406 0.593 8.968 25.129

AOL

Sq. ret. Avg. vol.

8008

8008

0.143 7084.337

0.403 5979.153

0.000

1.000

9.000 84250.000

0.000 1645.000

0.001 2131.818

0.034 5383.333

0.335 13876.471

0.581 17995.000

--

1132.700 14754.230

41942.224

Trades
8008 26.424
9.537 1.000 75.000 12.000 15.000 26.000 39.000 43.000
9868.857

Returns
8008 0.000 0.245 -1.680 1.854 -0.391 -0.272 0.000 0.269 0.380 7.423 42.988

Boeing

Sq. ret. Avg. vol.

8008

8008

0.060 1829.393

0.153 1683.701

0.000

1.000

3.437 24766.666

0.000

450.000

0.000

561.765

0.013 1327.273

0.150 3600.000

0.257 4900.000

--

1767.233 2878.382

35931.744

Trades
8008 19.735
8.283 1.000 63.000 9.000 10.000 19.000 31.000 35.000
18609.976

Obs Mean S.D. Min Max q05 q10 q50 q90 q95 Kurtosis LB(20)
MLB(20)

Returns
8008 0.002 0.315 -2.355 3.994 -0.476 -0.334 0.000 0.338 0.479 15.197 55.335

JP Morgan

Sq. ret. Avg. vol.

8008

8008

0.099 2960.285

0.374 2685.456

0.000

1.000

15.950 59153.332

0.000

747.826

0.000

920.000

0.021 2233.333

0.229 5729.412

0.411 7358.824

--

1401.054 9011.564

43873.529

Trades
8008 33.070 11.204
1.000 78.000 16.000 19.000 32.000 48.000 53.000
12520.965

Returns
8008 0.001 0.270 -1.668 2.000 -0.430 -0.310 0.000 0.289 0.425 7.464 26.568

IBM

Sq. ret. Avg. vol.

8008

8008

0.073 2375.869

0.186 2076.318

0.000

1.000

4.000 45540.000

0.000

696.774

0.000

841.509

0.018 1794.595

0.182 4470.371

0.308 5906.667

--

2590.101 19751.120

70348.102

Trades
8008 41.962 12.175
1.000 101.000
24.000 27.000 41.000 58.000 64.000
18070.49

33

Empirical Autocorrelation and Cross-Autocorrelation Functions
The following figures show the autocorrelation functions (ACF) and cross-autocorrelation functions (CACF) of squared log returns, average volumes per trade as well as the number of trades based on five minutes intervals for the AOL, Boeing, JP Morgan and IBM stocks traded at the NYSE. The upper plots are based on the plain series, whereas the lower plots are based on the seasonally adjusted series. The pictures on the left show the ACF of squared log returns (solid line), average volumes (broken line) and the number of trades (dotted line). The pictures on the right show the CACF of squared log returns and average volumes (solid line), of squared log returns and the number of trades (broken line), and of average volumes and the number of trades (dotted line). Data extracted from the 2001 TAQ data base. Sample period 02/01/01 to 31/05/01.
Figure 7: (Cross-)autocorrelation functions for the AOL stock.
Figure 8: (Cross-)autocorrelation functions for the Boeing stock.
34

Figure 9: (Cross-)autocorrelation functions for the JP Morgan stock.
Figure 10: (Cross-)autocorrelation functions for the IBM stock.
35

B.3 Estimation Results
B.3.1 Univariate SMEM's

Table 4: Maximum likelihood efficient importance sampling (ML-EIS) estimates of different parameterizations of (S)GARCH models up to a lag order of P = Q = 2 for five minutes log returns based on the AOL, Boeing, JP Morgan and IBM stocks traded at the NYSE. Data extracted from the 2001 TAQ data base. Sample period 02/01/01 to 31/05/01. Overnight returns are excluded. The models are re-initialized at every trading day. Standard errors are computed based on the inverse of the estimated Hessian. The ML-EIS estimates are computed using R = 50 Monte Carlo replications based on 5 EIS iterations. Diagnostics: log likelihood function (LL), Bayes Information Criterion (BIC), mean, standard deviation and Ljung-Box statistic (LB) of the filtered residuals as well as Ljung-Box statistic (LB2) of the squared filtered residuals. The Ljung-Box statistics are computed based on 20 lags.

1 12112111
a 1
LL BIC Mean S.D. LB LB2

(1) -0.098 0.140
0.987
-13343 -13357 -0.002 1.000 16.047 58.640

(2) -0.001 0.197 -0.195 1.917 -0.918
-13278 -13300 -0.004 1.001 16.075 37.563

AOL (3) 0.314
0.961 0.229
-13115 -13129 -0.003 1.030 18.404 23.961

(4) -0.028 0.034
0.997
0.768 0.428
-13060 -13082 -0.005 1.021 15.957 35.679

(5) (1)

-0.006

-0.091

-0.035

0.136

0.043

1.718 0.982

-0.719

Latent Component

0.830

0.403

Diagnostics

-13057

-13456

-13088

-13469

-0.004

0.008

1.022

1.000

16.191

27.207

37.821 61.011

(2) -0.154 0.166 0.060 0.143 0.830
-13449 -13471 0.009 1.000 27.38 56.599

Boeing (3)
0.3092
0.941 0.291
-13145 -13177 0.008 1.037 24.4236 28.739

(4) -0.035 0.042
0.996
0.675 0.553
-13217 -13230 0.008 1.019 24.664 29.936

(5) -0.011 -0.064 0.077 1.585 -0.586
0.775 0.513
-13151 -13173 0.008 1.020 24.046 38.530

(1)

1 -0.149

12111121

0.224 0.967

a 1

LL -13351 BIC -13365 Mean -0.004 S.D. 1.000 LB 24.978 LB2 21.383

JP Morgan

(2) (3) (4)

-0.139 0.283 -0.013

0.260

0.016

-0.052

0.972

0.998

-0.000

0.951 0.860 0.275 0.379

-13349 -13371 -0.004 1.000 25.265 21.585

-13071 -13085 -0.005 1.029 25.793 21.984

-13028 -13050 -0.006 1.025 26.419 27.806

(5) (1) -0.003 -0.121 -0.031 0.168 0.035 1.729 0.986 -0.730
Latent Component 0.876 0.384

Diagnostics

-13023

-13040

-13055

-13054

-0.006

0.001

1.020

1.000

26.311

26.761

26.033

51.424

(2) -0.009 0.228 -0.215 1.826 -0.827
-12998 -13021 0.000 1.002 24.070 17.027

IBM (3)
0.323
0.981 0.167
-12883 -12896 0.001 1.017 27.162 26.663

(4) -0.030 0.037
0.997

(5) -0.045 0.003 0.051 0.593 0.402

0.860 0.847 0.302 0.320

-12849 -12871 0.000 1.013 24.154 11.659

-12848 -12879 0.000 1.013 24.141 14.762

36

Table 5: Maximum likelihood efficient importance sampling (ML-EIS) estimates of different parameterizations of (S)ACD models up to a lag order of P = Q = 2 for five minutes average trading volumes per trade based on the AOL, Boeing, JP Morgan and IBM stocks traded at the NYSE. Data extracted from the 2001 TAQ data base. Sample period 02/01/01 to 31/05/01. Overnight observations are excluded. The models are re-initialized at every trading day. Standard errors are computed based on the inverse of the estimated Hessian. The ML-EIS estimates are computed using R = 50 Monte Carlo replications based on 5 EIS iterations. Diagnostics: log likelihood function (LL), Bayes Information Criterion (BIC), mean, standard deviation and Ljung-Box statistic (LB) of the filtered residuals. The Ljung-Box statistics are computed based on 20 lags.

(1)

2 -0.384

12222122

0.007 0.943

p2 0.636

m2 7.916

a 2

LL BIC Mean S.D. LB

-4896 -4919 1.003 0.655 78.440

(2) -0.180 0.013 -0.007 1.216 -0.240 0.682 6.974
-4859 -4890 1.002 0.648 24.061

AOL (3)
-3.291
0.715 9.380
0.934 0.180
-4665 -4688 1.009 0.661 69.079

(4) -0.080 0.018
0.986
1.315 4.609
0.500 0.373
-4594 -4626 1.009 0.650 30.044

(5) (1) -0.037 -0.403 -0.013 0.001 0.021 1.340 0.928 -0.349 1.342 0.517 4.672 8.032
Latent Component 0.654 0.363

Diagnostics

-4568

-6211

-4608

-6234

1.015

1.011

0.656

0.871

19.679

39.166

(2) -0.416 0.002 -0.000 0.761 0.165 0.519 7.991
-6200 -6232 1.010 0.870 23.256

Boeing (3)
-5.841
0.450 12.753
0.954 0.113
-6019 -6041 1.017 0.890 38.896

(4) -0.070 0.011
0.981
1.202 4.276

(5)
-0.057 -0.006 0.014 1.074 -0.091 1.188 4.321

0.260 0.391 0.506 0.494

-5954 -5985 1.024 0.901 19.486

-5943 -5983 1.027 0.909 15.183

(1)

2 -0.403

121222

0.004 0.932

22

p2 0.591

m2 7.844

a 2

LL BIC Mean S.D. LB

-5454 -5477 1.005 0.741 37.492

(2)
-0.307 0.007 -0.002 0.915 0.034 0.614 7.314

JP Morgan (3) (4)
-3.420 -0.072 0.018
0.984
0.666 1.388 8.772 3.950

0.919 0.398 0.182 0.429

-5429 -5460 1.005 0.738 10.981

-5260 -5282 1.012 0.752 31.336

-5164 -5196 1.014 0.751 28.924

(5) (1)

-0.139 -0.435

0.021 0.008

0.020

-0.016 0.929

0.983

1.475 0.692

3.458 8.696

Latent Component

0.419

0.424

Diagnostics

-5158

-4229

-5199

-4251

1.019

1.001

0.745

0.570

26.131

74.995

(2) -0.206 0.015 -0.008 1.242 -0.273 0.737 7.740
-4201 -4232 1.001 0.563 24.832

IBM (3)
-2.440
0.888 7.894
0.932 0.159
-4038 -4060 1.0062 0.5704 73.2686

(4) -0.087 0.022
0.980
1.462 4.445
0.512 0.314
-3973 -4004 1.009 0.569 35.089

(5) -0.060 -0.002 0.018 1.194 -0.210 1.531 4.371
0.590 0.317
-3956 -3996 1.007 0.570 24.806

37

Table 6: Maximum likelihood efficient importance sampling (ML-EIS) estimates of different parameterizations of (S)ACD models up to a lag order of P = Q = 2 for the number of trades in five minutes intervals based on the AOL, Boeing, JP Morgan and IBM stocks traded at the NYSE. Data extracted from the 2001 TAQ data base. Sample period 02/01/01 to 31/05/01. Overnight observations are excluded. The models are re-initialized at every trading day. Standard errors are computed based on the inverse of the estimated Hessian. The ML-EIS estimates are computed using R = 50 Monte Carlo replications based on 5 EIS iterations. Diagnostics: log likelihood function (LL), Bayes Information Criterion (BIC), mean, standard deviation and Ljung-Box statistic (LB) of the filtered residuals. The Ljung-Box statistics are computed based on 20 lags.

(1)

3 -0.307

21331332

0.146 0.892

p3 1.910

m3 2.970

a 3

LL -1707 BIC -1729 Mean 1.000 S.D. 0.308 LB 69.340

(2)
-0.060 0.177 -0.143 1.554 -0.571 2.016 2.707

AOL (3)
-0.226
2.800 2.002

0.913 0.097

-1680 -1711 0.999 0.307 37.517

-1697 -1720 1.006 0.311 74.685

(4) (5)

(1)

-0.055 -0.047 -0.202

0.053 0.104 0.077

-0.061

0.972 0.940 0.953

0.035

3.695 3.241 1.632

1.326 1.524 3.674

Latent Component

0.731 0.793

0.128 0.103

Diagnostics

-1661

-1652

-1982

-1693

-1693

-2005

1.002

1.001

0.999

0.309

0.308

0.323

40.070 28.066

55.018

(2)
-0.025 0.105 -0.092 1.704 -0.708 1.752 3.237

Boeing (3)
-0.426
2.170 2.639

(4) -0.035 0.026
0.991
2.563 2.100

(5)
-0.042 0.046 -0.018 0.562 0.427 2.366 2.317

0.957 0.766 0.821 0.067 0.110 0.092

-1957 -1988 0.999 0.322 33.285

-1975

-1925

-1998

-1956

1.002

1.001

0.324

0.322

54.158 36.095

-1921 -1961 1.002 0.322 24.503

JP Morgan

IBM

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)

3 -0.339 -0.013 -0.018

-0.013 -0.011 -0.372 -0.167 -0.226 -0.4510 -0.022

133132

0.184 0.847

0.212 -0.203 1.629

23 -0.631

0.014 0.997

0.144 -0.134 1.252 -0.254

0.150 0.908

0.183 -0.107 1.282 -0.316

0.1223 0.056 -0.081
0.3125 0.811 -0.009

p3 2.234 2.429 4.174 4.561 3.307 2.121 2.220 3.758 2.8989 3.436

m3 2.718 2.386 1.316 1.214 1.702 4.762 4.406 2.492 3.2868 2.758

Latent Component

a

0.873 0.739 0.783

0.913 0.9506 0.951

3

0.105 0.126 0.082

0.083 0.0464 0.068

Diagnostics

LL -966

-869

-969

-877

-854

948

987

985

1021

1022

BIC -988

-901

-991

-909

-894

926

955 962 989 981

Mean 1.000

1.000

1.003

1.002

0.998

1.000

0.999

1.002

1.000

1.003

S.D. 0.277

0.273

0.279

0.276

0.274

0.218

0.217

0.219

0.217

0.218

LB 139.049 46.393 138.346 69.345 30.356 87.077  10.400 92.165 10.655 20.401

38

B.3.2 Multivariate SMEM's

Table 7: Maximum likelihood efficient importance sampling (ML-EIS) estimates of different parameterizations of SMEM specifications up to a lag order of P = Q = 2 models for the log return volatility, the average volume per trade and the number of trades per five minutes interval for the AOL stock traded on the NYSE. Data extracted from the 2001 TAQ data base. Sample period 02/01/01 to 31/05/01. Overnight observations are excluded. The models are re-initialized for every trading day. Standard errors are computed based on the inverse of the estimated Hessian. The ML-EIS estimates are computed using R = 50 Monte Carlo replications based on 5 EIS iterations. Diagnostics: log likelihood function (LL), Bayes Information Criterion (BIC), mean, standard deviation and Ljung-Box statistics of the filtered residuals (LB) and squared filtered residuals (LB2, only for the return process) as well as multivariate Ljung-Box statistic (MLB). The Ljung-Box statistics are computed based on 20 lags.

1 2 3 012 021033 133131211211112111231313221 221221 323 111 111112221132132 111333321 222321321 p2 m2 p3 m3
a 1 2 3
LL BIC MLB
Mean S.D. LB LB2
Mean S.D. LB
Mean S.D. LB

(1) -0.419 -0.933 -0.265 0.082 -0.144 -0.739 0.136 0.010 0.010 -0.001 0.018 0.000 0.156 0.328 0.177
0.974 0.050 -0.011 -0.058 0.840 0.021 0.113 0.700 0.904
0.771 7.081 2.020 2.686
-18856 -18981 182.992
-0.004 1.000 15.472 40.032
1.000 0.536 116.756
0.999 0.308 67.939

(2) -0.041 -2.236 -0.062 0.789 0.714 -0.669 0.331 0.047 0.000 0.007 0.014 0.000 0.028 -0.109 0.183 0.293 0.010 -0.151 -0.137
0.079
1.574 0.290 0.371 -0.589 0.684 8.233 2.000 2.746
-19100 -19226 391.119
-0.016 1.000 16.682 322.974
1.000 0.554 1306.748
0.999 0.307 32.587

(3) -0.540 -1.116 -0.023
0.255 0.201 -0.762
0.165 0.030 -0.004 0.001 0.011 0.000 -0.121 0.020 0.228
0.134 0.006 -0.212
0.055 0.111 0.000 -0.174 0.298 0.001 -0.188 0.838 1.699
0.864 0.394 -0.706 0.732 8.031 2.231 2.227

(4) 0.592 -2.091 -0.286 0.365 0.692 -0.589

(5) -0.062 -1.627 -0.307 -0.038 -0.032 -0.778 0.064

0.003

0.146

0.994

0.223

0.892

0.965 6.248 2.103 2.052 Latent Component 0.933 0.176 0.156 -0.032

0.989 6.153 1.910 2.970
0.936 0.231 0.143 0.000

Diagnostics

-18730

-19818

-18359

-18883

-19881

-18449

354.426 14629.940 135.187

Diagnostics for the return process

-0.006

-0.004

-0.003

0.999

1.025

1.039

16.279

18.568

18.195

40.399

141.275

13.632

Diagnostics for the volume process

1.000

1.003

1.007

0.531

0.554

0.537

67.612

95.032

49.266

Diagnostics for the trading intensity process

0.999

1.000

0.999

0.308

0.348

0.308

138.980 7589.183

69.350

(6) 0.271 -1.879 -0.057 0.080 0.112 -0.785 0.110 0.002 0.000 -0.030 0.005 0.000 -0.065 -0.008 0.176 0.053 0.001 -0.144 0.508
0.233
1.567 0.450 -0.025 -0.582 0.916 6.770 2.009 2.728
0.950 0.263 0.119 0.002
-18278 -18422 88.525
-0.005 1.046 19.094 12.503
1.007 0.534 26.084
0.999 0.307 37.790

(7) 0.308 -1.877 -0.076 0.064 0.130 -0.784 0.091 -0.004 0.002 -0.026 0.009 0.000 -0.025 -0.015 0.170 0.032 -0.001 -0.145 0.516 -0.239 -0.005 0.051 0.193 -0.012 -0.005 0.003 1.551 0.473 -0.004 -0.578 0.898 6.775 2.008 2.730
0.943 0.279 0.111 0.003
-18250 -18421 95.614
-0.004 1.050 19.861 12.941
1.005 0.528 26.617
0.999 0.307 37.616

39

Table 8: Maximum likelihood efficient importance sampling (ML-EIS) estimates of different parameterizations of SMEM specifications up to a lag order of P = Q = 2 models for the log return volatility, the average volume per trade and the number of trades per five minutes interval for the Boeing stock traded on the NYSE. Data extracted from the 2001 TAQ data base. Sample period 02/01/01 to 31/05/01. Overnight observations are excluded. The models are re-initialized for every trading day. Standard errors are computed based on the inverse of the estimated Hessian. The ML-EIS estimates are computed using R = 50 Monte Carlo replications based on 5 EIS iterations. Diagnostics: log likelihood function (LL), Bayes Information Criterion (BIC), mean, standard deviation and Ljung-Box statistics of the filtered residuals (LB) and squared filtered residuals (LB2, only for the return process) as well as multivariate Ljung-Box statistic (MLB). The Ljung-Box statistics are computed based on 20 lags.

1 2 3 101020233 121111111312 131331212123132 222121 323 111111111231112233131323212 222321321 p2 m2 p3 m3
a 1 2 3
LL BIC MLB
Mean S.D. LB LB2
Mean S.D. LB
Mean S.D. LB

(1) 1.829 -1.087 -0.224 0.554 1.037 -0.235 0.257 -0.005 0.003 -0.001 0.000 0.000 -0.167 0.048 0.076
0.386 0.112 0.002 0.227 0.808 -0.003 -0.029 0.032 0.950
0.491 9.167 1.628 3.696
-21087 -21213 356.292
-0.000 0.999 46.321 192.847
1.010 0.851 44.154
0.999 0.323 54.691

(2) 0.532 -0.809 -0.030 0.576 1.040 -0.042 0.252 0.032 -0.001 -0.001 0.001 0.000 -0.173 0.016 0.109 0.193 0.001 -0.095 0.256
0.221
1.680 0.117 0.652 -0.685 0.500 8.640 1.786 3.128
-21140 -21265 159.818
-0.002 1.000 41.711 154.040
1.010 0.862 39.175
0.999 0.321 33.924

(3) 0.733 -0.610 -0.033
0.565 1.081 -0.214
0.224 -0.025 -0.001 -0.001 0.001 0.000 -0.207 0.078 0.099 0.158 -0.001 -0.093
0.337 0.066 0.002 0.058 1.090 -0.004 -0.306 0.104 1.767
0.121 -0.197 -0.773 0.505 8.698 1.739 3.293

(4) 0.625 -6.611 -0.408 0.594 0.682 -0.422

(5) -0.121 -2.197 -0.188 -0.087 0.034 -0.381 0.134

-0.001

0.077

0.948

0.169

0.948

0.396 12.650 2.164 2.551 Latent Component 0.950 0.111 0.058 0.069

0.774 6.750 1.726 3.424
0.656 0.625 0.407 0.046

Diagnostics

-21015

-21744

-21022

-21168

-21807

-21112

208.131 5425.582 345.815

Diagnostics for the return process

-0.001

0.001

0.007

0.999

1.005

1.033

42.410

46.833

29.763

116.050 408.055

46.259

Diagnostics for the volume process

1.010

1.012

1.016

0.849

0.875

0.857

24.091

1883.849 226.193

Diagnostics for the trading intensity process

0.999

1.000

1.001

0.321

0.329

0.323

33.712

201.586

44.662

(6) 0.460 -2.531 -0.155 0.020 0.259 -0.442 0.083 -0.032 -0.006 -0.005 -0.000 -0.000 -0.236 -0.064 0.090 0.140 0.000 -0.002 0.560
0.163
0.606 0.301 0.092 0.343 0.625 8.313 1.879 3.084
0.804 0.524 0.305 0.070
-20906 -21050 120.257
0.005 1.027 29.401 60.415
1.017 0.840 93.834
0.997 0.322 22.152

(7) 0.712 -2.124 -0.128 0.004 0.828 -0.257 0.083 -0.043 -0.002 -0.004 -0.001 0.000 -0.269 0.035 0.085 0.116 -0.001 -0.084 0.560 -0.066 -0.005 0.176 0.423 -0.035 -0.742 0.187 1.778 0.343 -0.051 -0.783 0.622 8.520 1.663 3.626
0.827 0.453 0.283 0.025
-20819 -20990 86.327
0.000 1.020 31.776 40.050
1.019 0.855 60.773
1.019 0.328 34.923

40

Table 9: Maximum likelihood efficient importance sampling (ML-EIS) estimates of different parameterizations of SMEM specifications up to a lag order of P = Q = 2 models for the log return volatility, the average volume per trade and the number of trades per five minutes interval for the JP Morgan stock traded on the NYSE. Data extracted from the 2001 TAQ data base. Sample period 02/01/01 to 31/05/01. Overnight observations are excluded. The models are re-initialized for every trading day. Standard errors are computed based on the inverse of the estimated Hessian. The ML-EIS estimates are computed using R = 50 Monte Carlo replications based on 5 EIS iterations. Diagnostics: log likelihood function (LL), Bayes Information Criterion (BIC), mean, standard deviation and Ljung-Box statistics of the filtered residuals (LB) and squared filtered residuals (LB2, only for the return process) as well as multivariate Ljung-Box statistic (MLB). The Ljung-Box statistics are computed based on 20 lags.

1 2 3 200110332 133113121211211111321312231 232212321 111121111321 111113332232132 222321321 p2 m2 p3 m3
a 1 2 3
LL BIC MLB
Mean S.D. LB LB2
Mean S.D. LB
Mean S.D. LB

(1) 2.394 -1.584 -0.292 0.817 0.841 -0.885 0.149 0.025 0.020 -0.001 0.003 0.000 0.554 0.320 0.208
0.007 0.191 -0.006 0.677 0.646 0.025 1.320 0.472 0.873
0.687 7.633 2.308 2.577
-18403 -18529 769.914
-0.018 0.999 36.093 376.349
1.001 0.598 27.975
1.000 0.276 138.865

(2) 0.217 -2.635 -0.018 0.979 1.112 -0.785 0.225 0.068 0.000 0.005 0.010 0.000 0.008 -0.110 0.216 0.263 0.007 -0.205 -0.107
0.057
1.609 0.089 0.305 -0.612 0.634 8.066 2.393 2.451
-18784 -18910 1830.305
-0.021 0.999 37.518 406.581
1.001 0.617 1393.848
1.000 0.274 38.987

(3) 1.996 -1.410 -0.016
0.859 0.910 -0.882 0.138 0.009 0.001 -0.003 0.005 0.000 0.550 0.388 0.216
0.117 -0.002 -0.207
0.051 0.170 0.000 0.646 0.708 0.000 1.166 0.527 1.623
-0.068 -0.017 -0.625 0.720 6.947 2.438 2.373

(4) 0.529 -2.240 -0.225 0.492 0.365 -1.158

(5) -0.097 -1.471 -0.337 -0.078 -0.091 -0.953 0.097

0.005

0.188

0.972

0.178

0.836

0.863 5.800 2.414 1.986 Latent Component 0.951 0.165 0.122 0.024

1.027 4.917 2.287 2.620
0.907 0.339 0.176 0.009

Diagnostics

-18306

-19398

-18201

-18458

-19461

-18291

665.637 12670.643 288.422

Diagnostics for the return process

-0.019

-0.011

-0.004

0.999

1.026

1.048

35.911

31.627

26.265

355.220 35.564

40.740

Diagnostics for the volume process

1.001

1.003

1.009

0.600

0.609

0.598

22.132

90.389

46.434

Diagnostics for the trading intensity process

1.000

0.999

1.000

0.273

0.306

0.276

43.659

6337.353

140.305

(6) 0.167 -2.035 -0.008 0.023 0.022 -0.941 0.085 -0.004 0.000 -0.022 0.005 0.000 -0.037 -0.054 0.212 0.053 -0.001 -0.206 0.861
0.115
1.625 0.086 0.025 -0.626 0.854 6.537 2.454 2.364
0.941 0.339 0.136 0.011
-18040 -18184 171.290
-0.005 1.067 25.315 6.513
1.009 0.597 11.269
0.999 0.273 50.553

(7) 0.209 -2.122 -0.005 0.050 -0.033 -0.958 0.072 -0.010 0.001 -0.029 0.010 0.000 0.096 -0.101 0.214 0.049 -0.004 -0.210 0.789 -0.246 -0.001 0.066 0.083 -0.001 0.180 -0.427 1.655 0.177 -0.077 -0.657 0.890 5.869 2.579 2.173
0.930 0.350 0.132 0.015
-18009 -18180 197.625
-0.006 1.056 24.722 11.903
1.006 0.592 17.671
1.000 0.273 53.280

41

Table 10: Maximum likelihood efficient importance sampling (ML-EIS) estimates of different parameterizations of SMEM specifications up to a lag order of P = Q = 2 models for the log return volatility, the average volume per trade and the number of trades per five minutes interval for the IBM stock traded on the NYSE. Data extracted from the 2001 TAQ data base. Sample period 02/01/01 to 31/05/01. Overnight observations are excluded. The models are re-initialized for every trading day. Standard errors are computed based on the inverse of the estimated Hessian. The ML-EIS estimates are computed using R = 50 Monte Carlo replications based on 5 EIS iterations. Diagnostics: log likelihood function (LL), Bayes Information Criterion (BIC), mean, standard deviation and Ljung-Box statistics of the filtered residuals (LB) and squared filtered residuals (LB2, only for the return process) as well as multivariate Ljung-Box statistic (MLB). The Ljung-Box statistics are computed based on 20 lags.

1 2 3 201010332 111211113121 213121131331232 222121 323 111111111333222111123321231 222123123 p2 m2 p3 m3
a 1 2 3
LL BIC MLB
Mean S.D. LB LB2
Mean S.D. LB
Mean S.D. LB

(1) 0.057 -0.089 -0.036 0.077 0.074 -0.080 0.024 0.003 0.000 -0.005 0.002 0.000 -0.012 0.031 0.016
0.063 0.007 0.000 -0.006 0.081 0.001 -0.030 0.068 0.091
0.083 7.271 2.225 4.373
-15389 -15515 324.925
-0.009 1.000 18.485 175.325
1.000 0.485 50.970
0.999 0.217 83.299

(2) 0.547 -1.267 -0.192 0.821 0.712 -0.394 0.203 0.044 0.003 -0.015 0.019 0.001 -0.138 -0.061 0.188 0.230 0.014 -0.110 0.340
0.071
1.289 0.133 0.642 -0.329 0.759 7.778 2.222 4.424
-15798 -15924 686.107
-0.008 0.999 17.055 282.111
1.000 0.512 444.839
0.999 0.216 9.630

(3) 0.372 -0.784 -0.200
0.792 0.746 -0.783
0.183 0.025 0.000 -0.052 0.021 0.001 -0.136 0.344 0.191 0.131 -0.004 -0.101
0.580 0.048 0.001 -0.108 0.866 0.000 -0.347 0.701 1.211
0.044 -0.009 -0.252 0.847 6.936 2.303 4.131

(4) 0.504 -1.420 -0.517 0.704 0.182 -1.355

(5) 0.494 -1.831 -0.373 0.596 0.585 -0.768 0.070

0.016

0.153

-0.228

0.176

0.900

1.168 4.466 2.294 3.499 Latent Component 0.942 0.154 0.146 0.044

0.965 6.492 2.156 4.642
0.967 0.141 0.087 0.004

Diagnostics

-15338

-16959

-15349

-15490

-17021

-15439

240.460 19077.193 833.269

Diagnostics for the return process

-0.009

-0.009

-0.006

1.000

1.014

1.009

17.720

17.105

19.767

154.973 622.605

313.360

Diagnostics for the volume process

0.999

1.003

1.001

0.484

0.512

0.487

47.007

257.354

54.532

Diagnostics for the trading intensity process

0.999

0.999

0.999

0.216

0.246

0.217

12.195

6935.761  84.642

(6) 0.316 -1.307 -0.160 0.128 0.099 -0.866 0.068 0.018 -0.001 -0.061 0.012 -0.001 -0.086 0.110 0.182 0.086 0.001 -0.105 0.471
0.400
1.272 0.496 -0.091 -0.313 1.190 4.953 2.278 4.255
0.940 0.263 0.133 0.012
-15106 -15250 95.978
0.000 1.026 23.732 18.042
1.005 0.481 56.413
1.000 0.216 11.464

(7) 1.079 -1.403 -0.305 0.140 0.429 -0.789 0.067 0.015 0.002 -0.064 0.013 0.001 0.015 0.136 0.151 0.048 0.001 -0.087 0.596 -0.050 -0.007 0.477 0.436 -0.059 0.114 0.105 1.122 0.414 -0.115 -0.229 1.115 5.470 2.172 4.620
0.944 0.256 0.123 0.003
-15086 -15257 76.669
0.000 1.028 24.735 16.570
1.004 0.483 54.164
1.000 0.216 11.405

42

B.4 Estimated Generalized Impulse Response Functions
Figure 11: Generalized impulse response of a one S.D. shock of i on i2 (left), Vi (middle) and i (right) for the AOL stock. Computed based on 5, 000 Monte Carlo simulations using the estimates of specification (7) (Table 7).
Figure 12: Generalized impulse response of a one S.D. shock of i on i2 (left), Vi (middle) and i (right) for the Boeing stock. Computed based on 5, 000 Monte Carlo simulations using the estimates of specification (7) (Table 8).
Figure 13: Generalized impulse response of a one S.D. shock of i on i2 (left), Vi (middle) and i (right) for the JP Morgan stock. Computed based on 5, 000 Monte Carlo simulations using the estimates of specification (7) (Table 9).
Figure 14: Generalized impulse response of a one S.D. shock of i on i2 (left), Vi (middle) and i (right) for the IBM stock. Computed based on 5, 000 Monte Carlo simulations using the estimates of specification (7) (Table 10).
43

B.5 Graphical Illustrations
Figure 15: Plotted (filtered) estimates of exp(i), Yi2, Vi and i (from top to down) for the AOL stock. Computed based on the estimates of specification (7) (Table 7).
Figure 16: Plotted (filtered) estimates of exp(i), Yi2, Vi and i (from top to down) for the IBM stock. Computed based on the estimates of specification (7) (Table 10).
44

SFB 649 Discussion Paper Series 2007
For a complete list of Discussion Papers published by the SFB 649, please visit http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de.
001 "Trade Liberalisation, Process and Product Innovation, and Relative Skill Demand" by Sebastian Braun, January 2007.
002 "Robust Risk Management. Accounting for Nonstationarity and Heavy Tails" by Ying Chen and Vladimir Spokoiny, January 2007.
003 "Explaining Asset Prices with External Habits and Wage Rigidities in a DSGE Model." by Harald Uhlig, January 2007.
004 "Volatility and Causality in Asia Pacific Financial Markets" by Enzo Weber, January 2007.
005 "Quantile Sieve Estimates For Time Series" by Jürgen Franke, JeanPierre Stockis and Joseph Tadjuidje, February 2007.
006 "Real Origins of the Great Depression: Monopolistic Competition, Union Power, and the American Business Cycle in the 1920s" by Monique Ebell and Albrecht Ritschl, February 2007.
007 "Rules, Discretion or Reputation? Monetary Policies and the Efficiency of Financial Markets in Germany, 14th to 16th Centuries" by Oliver Volckart, February 2007.
008 "Sectoral Transformation, Turbulence, and Labour Market Dynamics in Germany" by Ronald Bachmann and Michael C. Burda, February 2007.
009 "Union Wage Compression in a Right-to-Manage Model" by Thorsten Vogel, February 2007.
010 "On -additive robust representation of convex risk measures for unbounded financial positions in the presence of uncertainty about the market model" by Volker Krätschmer, March 2007.
011 "Media Coverage and Macroeconomic Information Processing" by Alexandra Niessen, March 2007.
012 "Are Correlations Constant Over Time? Application of the CC-TRIGt-test to Return Series from Different Asset Classes." by Matthias Fischer, March 2007.
013 "Uncertain Paternity, Mating Market Failure, and the Institution of Marriage" by Dirk Bethmann and Michael Kvasnicka, March 2007.
014 "What Happened to the Transatlantic Capital Market Relations?" by Enzo Weber, March 2007.
015 "Who Leads Financial Markets?" by Enzo Weber, April 2007. 016 "Fiscal Policy Rules in Practice" by Andreas Thams, April 2007. 017 "Empirical Pricing Kernels and Investor Preferences" by Kai Detlefsen,
Wolfgang Härdle and Rouslan Moro, April 2007. 018 "Simultaneous Causality in International Trade" by Enzo Weber, April
2007. 019 "Regional and Outward Economic Integration in South-East Asia" by
Enzo Weber, April 2007. 020 "Computational Statistics and Data Visualization" by Antony Unwin,
Chun-houh Chen and Wolfgang Härdle, April 2007. 021 "Ideology Without Ideologists" by Lydia Mechtenberg, April 2007. 022 "A Generalized ARFIMA Process with Markov-Switching Fractional
Differencing Parameter" by Wen-Jen Tsay and Wolfgang Härdle, April 2007.
SFB 649, Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

023 "Time Series Modelling with Semiparametric Factor Dynamics" by Szymon Borak, Wolfgang Härdle, Enno Mammen and Byeong U. Park, April 2007.
024 "From Animal Baits to Investors' Preference: Estimating and Demixing of the Weight Function in Semiparametric Models for Biased Samples" by Ya'acov Ritov and Wolfgang Härdle, May 2007.
025 "Statistics of Risk Aversion" by Enzo Giacomini and Wolfgang Härdle, May 2007.
026 "Robust Optimal Control for a Consumption-Investment Problem" by Alexander Schied, May 2007.
027 "Long Memory Persistence in the Factor of Implied Volatility Dynamics" by Wolfgang Härdle and Julius Mungo, May 2007.
028 "Macroeconomic Policy in a Heterogeneous Monetary Union" by Oliver Grimm and Stefan Ried, May 2007.
029 "Comparison of Panel Cointegration Tests" by Deniz Dilan Karaman Örsal, May 2007.
030 "Robust Maximization of Consumption with Logarithmic Utility" by Daniel Hernández-Hernández and Alexander Schied, May 2007.
031 "Using Wiki to Build an E-learning System in Statistics in Arabic Language" by Taleb Ahmad, Wolfgang Härdle and Sigbert Klinke, May 2007.
032 "Visualization of Competitive Market Structure by Means of Choice Data" by Werner Kunz, May 2007.
033 "Does International Outsourcing Depress Union Wages? by Sebastian Braun and Juliane Scheffel, May 2007.
034 "A Note on the Effect of Outsourcing on Union Wages" by Sebastian Braun and Juliane Scheffel, May 2007.
035 "Estimating Probabilities of Default With Support Vector Machines" by Wolfgang Härdle, Rouslan Moro and Dorothea Schäfer, June 2007.
036 "Yxilon ­ A Client/Server Based Statistical Environment" by Wolfgang Härdle, Sigbert Klinke and Uwe Ziegenhagen, June 2007.
037 "Calibrating CAT Bonds for Mexican Earthquakes" by Wolfgang Härdle and Brenda López Cabrera, June 2007.
038 "Economic Integration and the Foreign Exchange" by Enzo Weber, June 2007.
039 "Tracking Down the Business Cycle: A Dynamic Factor Model For Germany 1820-1913" by Samad Sarferaz and Martin Uebele, June 2007.
040 "Optimal Policy Under Model Uncertainty: A Structural-Bayesian Estimation Approach" by Alexander Kriwoluzky and Christian Stoltenberg, July 2007.
041 "QuantNet ­ A Database-Driven Online Repository of Scientific Information" by Anton Andriyashin and Wolfgang Härdle, July 2007.
042 "Exchange Rate Uncertainty and Trade Growth - A Comparison of Linear and Nonlinear (Forecasting) Models" by Helmut Herwartz and Henning Weber, July 2007.
043 "How do Rating Agencies Score in Predicting Firm Performance" by Gunter Löffler and Peter N. Posch, August 2007.
SFB 649, Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

044 "Ein Vergleich des binären Logit-Modells mit künstlichen neuronalen Netzen zur Insolvenzprognose anhand relativer Bilanzkennzahlen" by Ronald Franken, August 2007.
045 "Promotion Tournaments and Individual Performance Pay" by Anja Schöttner and Veikko Thiele, August 2007.
046 "Estimation with the Nested Logit Model: Specifications and Software Particularities" by Nadja Silberhorn, Yasemin Boztu and Lutz Hildebrandt, August 2007.
047 "Risiken infolge von Technologie-Outsourcing?" by Michael Stephan, August 2007.
048 "Sensitivities for Bermudan Options by Regression Methods" by Denis Belomestny, Grigori Milstein and John Schoenmakers, August 2007.
049 "Occupational Choice and the Spirit of Capitalism" by Matthias Doepke and Fabrizio Zilibotti, August 2007.
050 "On the Utility of E-Learning in Statistics" by Wolfgang Härdle, Sigbert Klinke and Uwe Ziegenhagen, August 2007.
051 "Mergers & Acquisitions and Innovation Performance in the Telecommunications Equipment Industry" by Tseveen Gantumur and Andreas Stephan, August 2007.
052 "Capturing Common Components in High-Frequency Financial Time Series: A Multivariate Stochastic Multiplicative Error Model" by Nikolaus Hautsch, September 2007.
SFB 649, Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

