BERLIN

SFB 6 4 9 E C O N O M I C R I S K

SFB 649 Discussion Paper 2010-044
The High Sensitivity of Employment to Agency Costs: The Relevance of
Wage Rigidity
Atanas Hristov*
*Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".
http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de ISSN 1860-5664
SFB 649, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin

The High Sensitivity of Employment to Agency Costs: The Relevance of Wage Rigidity 
Atanas Hristov ¶
Humboldt Universität zu Berlin
September 1, 2010
Abstract This paper studies the interaction of financing constraints and labor market imperfections on the labor market and economic activity. My analysis builds on the agency cost framework of Carlstrom and Fuerst [1998. Agency costs and business cycles. Economic Theory, 12(3):583-597]. The aim of this article is to show that financing constraints can substantially amplify and propagate total factor productivity shocks in cyclical labor market dynamics. I find that under the Nash bargaining solution financing constraints increase substantially the volatility of wages, and in turn, amplification for the labor variables falls short of the observed volatilities in the data. Atop of this, the comovement between output and labor share is counterfactual. However, there is substantial scope for any type of wage rigidity and financing constraints to reinforce each other, and to generate the observed volatilities in the labor market, moreover, to produce a wide range of comovements between output and labor share.
JEL: E24, E32, J64, G24 Keywords: Credit and search frictions; Labor market; Unemployment;
1 Introduction
What role do financing constraints play for the cyclical behaviour of employment? This question has been always high in the agenda of both politicians and academicians as soon
I am grateful to Michael Burda and Sanjay Chugh for helpful discussions and comments. This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the CRC 649 "Economic Risk".
¶HU Berlin, Spandauer Str. 1, 10178 Berlin, Germany, E-mail: hristoat@cms.hu-berlin.de.
1

as the Great Depression. The idea that financing constraints, which may stem from moral hazard and/or adverse selection, could be relevant not only for corporate finance but also for macroeconomics has distilled in recent macroeconomic research.1 Both the theoretical and empirical literature on financing constraints has focused on fixed capital investment decisions.2 However, there are very few studies on the effects of financing constraints on the employment decisions of firms. Moreover these studies have dealt mainly with the influence of financing constraints on the level of employment.3 The payment of wages makes hiring sensitive to the financial market imperfections that firms face. Missing to account for the effect of financial constraints on wages means missing to account for a powerful effect on hiring and on economic activity in general. Moreover the forward-looking nature of employment also makes firms sensitive to future expected financing constraints.
This paper studies the interaction between financing constraints and labor market imperfections in the business cycle context on the behaviour of labor markets and economic activity. The aim of this article is to show that financing constraints can substantially amplify and propagate total factor productivity shocks in cyclical labor market dynamics (hereafter referred to as TFP). I focus on TFP shocks as the driving force of business cycles mainly for comparability with much of the existing business cycle literature.4 I find that (a) financing constraints are able to simultaneously generate both an effect of persistence and an effect of amplification on real economic activity. (b) However, under the assumption that the worker and firm bargain over the gains from trade, splitting the surplus according to the Nash bargaining solution (Nash, 1953), financing constraints increase substantially the volatility of wages. In turn, amplification for the labor variables falls short of the observed volatilities in the data. Moreover, the comovement between output and labor share is counterfactual. And (c) there is substantial scope for any type of wage rigidity and financing constraints to reinforce each other, and to generate the observed volatilities in the labor market, moreover, to produce a wide range of comovements between output and labor share.
I model financing constraints following the agency cost framework of Carlstrom and Fuerst (1998) (CF). Similar to them, I assume that informational problems may arise in
1Examples of papers making this type of early, significant contributions to the literature include Bernanke and Gertler (1989), Greenwald and Stiglitz (1990), Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997), Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) and Bernanke et al. (1999). Currently, the literature has burgeoned with a non-exhaustive list of examples such as Cúrdia and Woodford (2009), Gertler and Karadi (2009), Gertler and Kiyotaki (forthcoming) and Gilchrist et al. (2009).
2Hubbard (1998) provides a review of the literature. 3See, e.g., Acemoglu (2001) and Wasmer and Weil (2004). 4My treatment here follows broadly Pissarides (1985) and Mortensen and Pissarides (1994), the early analysis that integrates the labor search model into the real business cycle framework (Andolfatto, 1996; Merz, 1995), and recent analysis by Shimer (2010).
2

the production of aggregate output (hereafter, the 'output' model). The main insight in the CF model is that the asymmetric information between an entrepreneur (the borrower) and a financial intermediary (the lender) together with a costly state verification leads to a premium on the external finance. The premium arises because the lender monitors defaulting entrepreneurs and transfers this implicit cost onto the average cost of credit. In turn, the finance premium a firm pays to run a risky production manifests itself as an endogenous mark-up over the firm's total input costs: the firm demands a premium over operating cost. The appeal of the framework is that the financing constraints are endogenous over the business cycle.
I depart from CF in two main respects. First, to study employment (unemployment), contrary to total hours, I introduce labor search imperfections. There are two main reasons why departing from a Walrasian market are beneficial for the current analysis: (a) Labor search models provide an ideal laboratory for understanding employment and have been used extensively for this purpose. And (b) recent research suggests that search models have the potential to improve our understanding of business cycle fluctuations by delivering a framework for the analysis of alternative wage determination processes (Rogerson and Shimer, forthcoming). Second, following Faia and Monacelli (2007), I assume that the mean distribution of risky project outcomes across entrepreneurs is linked to the aggregate TFP in order for the 'output' model to better match the empirical evidence on the cyclical behavior of the external finance premium. The empirically observed finance premium is countercyclical, while the CF model predicts a counterfactual (procyclical) finance premium.5 As a consequence, in the discussed model economy, financing constraints generate both an effect of amplification and persistence (i.e., more pronounced hump-shaped dynamics of output and employment, as in CF) in response to the TFP shocks.6
Financing constraints seem a promising avenue for answering the question of why employment is so volatile. First, as mentioned above, they amplify shocks. Second, in the current framework, they have a direct impact on employment. Namely, relaxing the financing constraints allows the firm to run bigger risky projects, thus loosely speaking spend more resources on the project and less on external financing costs. In turn, a bigger project translates into higher employment. However, following the conventional way wages are determined in the model and the way Nash bargaining is calibrated, wages respond strongly to changes in TFP shocks, stronger than in an environment lacking financing constraints, and
5The limitation of the CF framework to account for cyclical behavior of the external finance premium was first noted by Gomes et al. (2003).
6In contrast to CF, where trade-off exists between amplification and propagation.
3

the incentives for the firms to hire do not change very much over the business cycle. Despite the fact that financing constraints affect hiring directly, the Nash bargaining wage overshadows the model's ability to reproduce key labor market variables. This result is manifestation of the findings in Shimer (2005).
Hall (2005) and Shimer (2005) have argued that real wage rigidity is central to explaining the cyclical behavior of unemployment and vacancies. Essentially, wage rigidity is central for giving the financing constraints a role in labor dynamics in the 'output' model in their own right. The reason behind is that under any type of rigid wage the loosening of the financing constraints is channelled into hiring (and not into an increase of the wage). The amplification of labor market variables in the 'output' model is increased significantly. Moreover, the 'output' model can generate a wide range of comovements between output and labor share dependent on the wage rigidity. On the contrary, the model without agency costs has implications for the labor share that seem too extreme: the labor share under rigid wages becomes almost perfectly negatively correlated with output. It seems that the substantive contribution of search models with financing constraints relies on the presence of matchspecific rents and the opportunity for a richer set of wage setting processes. This is where the contribution of the financing constraints lies: financial conditions lead to a much larger set of match-specific rents.
There are two studies most closely related to mine, both in terms of the question addressed - financing frictions may induce an amplified response of the labor market to aggregate TFP shocks - as well as methodology - build a business cycle framework in which the costly-stateverification problem is blended with search frictions a la Mortensen and Pissarides, Chugh (2009) and Petrosky-Nadeau (2009). I view my analysis as highly complementary to the two studies, despite the contrary conclusions we reach. The two papers state that conditional on a countercyclical external financing premium a financial accelerator mechanism amplifies labor market fluctuations. I agree with this conclusion, however conditional on a dose of wage rigidity. The first author presents some sophisticated arguments that induce some rigidity in the wage, similar to Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008).7 The second author builds wage rigidity directly by assuming that only hiring costs are subject to working capital requirements. This modelling assumption changes the relative volatilities of the firms' total input production costs. It makes hiring costs more volatile relative to the wage bill costs.
7It is worth noting that the authors Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008) as well as Chugh (2009) do not view their paper as one with wage rigidities. They introduce an unemployment benefit term in the wage rule, worker's outside option, that is basically a constant. Also they calibrate the Nash bargaining parameter using information that wages move less than one-for-one with productivity, which gives them a small value for the workers' bargaining power.
4

The outline of the paper is as follows. In the next section I present the theoretical framework. Section 3 discusses calibration issues and long-run equilibrium properties of the model economies. Section 4 discusses the results. Section 5 concludes. Various technical details are relegated to appendices.
2 The model economy
The core framework is a closed economy CF model. The model has a representative household, firms and financial intermediaries. Each household consists of a continuum of infinitelylived workers of measure one. Each firm is owned by an infinitely-lived entrepreneur (below I use 'entrepreneur' and 'firm' interchangeably). Firms undertake risky production activities and seek external resources in excess of their different and time-varying levels of internal funds. The household provides the resources that are channeled from financial intermediaries to firms using financial contracts. Financial frictions are a consequence of information asymmetries between lenders and borrowers. Because of the financial frictions and a limited supply of internal funds, firms are limited in borrowing by the premium associated with external finance.
The key modification of the model is the inclusion of labor search frictions. Each firm employs nt workers in the current period. To hire workers firms must expend resources which are assumed to be linear in the number of vacancies. Workers do not face job-finding costs. The total number of unemployed workers searching for a job is ut  1 - nt-1.8 Following convention, I assume that the aggregate number of new hires, mt, is a Cobb-Douglas (CD) function of unemployed workers and vacancies, mt = lutvt1-, where the parameter l reflects the efficiency of the matching process. The current probability that a firm fills a vacancy, µ(t), is given by µ(t)  mt/vt = ¯l- where t  vt/ut is labor market tightness, the ratio of vacancies, vt, to searching unemployed workers, ut. Similarly, the probability an unemployed worker finds a job, l(t), is given by l(t)  mt/ut = ¯l1-. Both firms and workers take µ(t) and l(t) as given. In a stationary environment, the above probabilities define the mean duration of unfilled vacancies and unemployment respectively. Finally, each firm exogenously separates from a fraction 0 < x < 1 of existing workers each period, where 1 - x is the probability a worker survives with the firm until the next period.
I now proceed to describe the behavior of the different sectors of the economy, along with the key resource constraints.
8All workers unemployed at the beginning of the period, ut, search for a job, that is, I abstract from labor force participation choices.
5

2.1 Production
This section provides an overview of the firm sector. Firms possess a production technology and hire workers and capital to produce goods. Firms are subject to an aggregate shock as well as idiosyncratic shocks. Timing of events in a given time period can be summarized as follows:
· Aggregate shock to productivity realizes. · Firms borrow resources from the loan market signing a contract (which is described
below). · Firms rent capital from households and entrepreneurs and post vacancies to attract
new workers. · Matching outcomes from current period's recruiting are realized and firms bargain
wages individually with the workers. · Stock of workers, employed from the previous period, break up exogenously with the
firms and become unemployed, at least till next period. · After observing the idiosyncratic shocks, firms produce goods and sell them in the
goods market. · Firms either repay their loans or declare bankruptcy and are monitored.
Each firm i uses labor, nit, and capital, kit, to operate a CD production function:

yit = mttkitn1it-

(1)

where t is an aggregate TFP shock that follows the following process: log t =  log t-1 + t, t iid N (0, 2). The idiosyncratic productivity shock t, with mean mt, is unknown at the time when the debt contract is signed and is independent and identically distributed across time. The shock variable has a continuous differentiable cumulative distribution function F (t, t) and a density function  (t, t). The riskiness of firm's i project is determined by the variance of the idiosyncratic shock, 2 . Notice that the average productivity of each entrepreneur is time-varying (e.g., Faia and Monacelli, 2007). I assume that each entrepreneur is on average more productive when total factor productivity t increases. This feature is key in driving the cyclical properties of the cost of external finance.
In the CF model the firm commits to and pays for its capital rentals, wage bills and hiring after observing the aggregate shock, t, but before observing the idiosyncratic shock, it and

6

thus before any output and revenue is realized.9 Let wt be the real wage rate, rt the rental rate on capital and  the per period cost of keeping a vacancy open. Respectively, hiring costs for an individual firm are given by mttvit, expressed in terms of the consumption goods.10 Total input costs are given by sit = wtnit + rtkit + mttvit. The firm uses the funds it receives from financial intermediaries as well as its net worth, ait, to finance the firm's input bill. I suppose that ait < sit. The entrepreneur's internal funds consists of the beginning-of-period market value of its accumulated capital stock, zit:

ait = zit [(1 - ) + rt] , 11

(2)

where 0 <  < 1 is the depreciation rate of capital.
The entrepreneur's idiosyncratic shock is privately observed, and thus creates a moral
hazard problem with external financing (as the entrepreneur may wish to underreport the
true value of the shock). The financial intermediaries can not observe the outcome of a
leveraged project. In case of bankruptcy financial intermediaries incur a cost to verify
the outcome that is proportional to the size of the firm's input cost, sit. This costly
state verification (CSV) ties the ability to obtain external finance to the net worth of an
entrepreneur. Townsend (1979), Gale and Hellwig (1985), and Williamson (1987) show that
in a world with CSV the optimal, incentive-compatible debt contract is a standard one period
debt contract.12 The contract is characterized by two values: project size sit and a critical
, denoted by ¯it. This critical or cut-off ¯it is the realization that triggers bankruptcy:
if it < ¯it then bankruptcy occurs and the financial intermediaries seize all of the firm's
output, while if it  ¯it, then the loan is re-paid and the firm keeps the excess output.
At this stage, I can define the functions g (¯t, t) and f (¯t, t) that represent the sharing
9A relatively small proportion of goods in the real economy are 'made to order,' and even when they are, only a relatively small fraction of the payment is made by the purchaser up front.
10The motivation for indexing hiring costs to aggregate TFP, t, (and to the idiosyncratic productivity, mt, in the 'output' model, but not in the 'investment' model) similar to Blanchard and Galí (2008), is to avoid effects of productivity shocks on the cost of hiring relative to the cost of producing, an effect I believe is better left out of the model for the current analysis. Alternatively, Shimer (2010) assumes that employees are used either in the production of consumption goods or in hiring. Both specifications lead to the unemployment rate being invariant to TFP shocks in a model with search frictions without capital and financing constraints, and under particular assumptions on preferences (balanced growth and additive separability between consumption and non-work activity). The reason for this result is that income and substitution effects cancel, leading to no change in employment, and in unemployment.
11For completeness, notice that net worth have to consist of capital income share and an arbitrarily small noncapital income share. The latter one is intended to provide an opportunity to bankrupt entrepreneurs to initialize projects in the current period. Since this has no effect on dynamics, I ignore it for simplicity.
12A crucial assumption of the CSV models is that both the lender and borrower are risk-neutral. In the current framework, entrepreneurs discounts the future stronger than household. As for the financial intermediary, there is no aggregate risk as the contract is: first, intra-period and second, financial intermediaries pool contracts, and thus, diversify away idiosyncratic risk.
7

rule between financial intermediaries and firms-borrowers (where firms' subscripts have been dropped) on the income implied by the risky intra-period loan at each point in time:

¯t
g (¯t, t) tdF (t, t) - F (¯t, t) + ¯t (1 - F (¯t, t)) ,
0 
f (¯t, t) (t - ¯t) dF (t, t)  tdF (t, t) - ¯t (1 - F (¯t, t)) .
¯t ¯t

(3) (4)

Notice that the sharing rule accounts for the dependence of the idiosyncratic mean on the realization of the aggregate shock, t. The function f (¯t, t) integrates only over values of t in excess of ¯t, while g (¯t, t) integrates over the lower part of the support. The two functions do not add to one: f (¯t, t)+g (¯t, t) = 1-F (¯t, t). This is due to the fact that there are costs of monitoring to be accounted for, F (¯t, t). Since the firm's production function is constant returns to scale (CRS) these bankruptcy costs imply that the firm's output must sell at a mark-up, pt. Because of this mark-up, the monitoring cost measured in terms of final output is ptst. In terms of final output, the firm's expected return on the financial contract is thus ptf (¯t, t) st, while that of financial intermediaries is ptg (¯t, t) st.
Debt contract Due to financial intermediaries being perfectly competitive, pt is taken as given in the maximization problem. The financial contract maximizes the expected firm's payoff

max ptf (¯t, t) st
st,¯t
subject to the zero profit condition on the financial intermediary:

(5)

ptg (¯t, t) st  st - at.

(6)

In equilibrium, any financial intermediary holds a pooled and perfectly safe portfolio. Therefore, the financial firm can obtain its funds at a riskless, intra-period opportunity cost to funds which equals unity. Perfect competition and free entry in the financial market imply that lenders' net cash flow must be zero in each period, i.e., the expected return from the lending activity would equal the opportunity cost of finance. It is easy to show that the solution to the problem above implies the following two first-order conditions:

ptf

(¯it, t)

=

f g

(¯it, t) (¯it, t)

[ptg (¯it, t) - 1] ,

sit = ait [1/ (1 - ptf (¯it, t))] .

(7) (8)

8

A few observations are in order. First, if there are no monitoring costs  = 0 then the markup disappears, pt = 1. Hence, the agency costs are manifested by an endogenous mark-up over production costs. Notice also from Eq. (7) that ¯it is a function only of pt, and not of the level of net worth of the firm. That is, all firms receive the same basic terms on their debt contract. Eq. (8) shows that st/at is independent of the level of the entrepreneur's net worth. That is, the contracts differ only in size - a firm with larger net worth simply implements a larger project size st. Therefore, Eq. (8) allows immediate aggregation.13
Given CRS, the cut-off ¯t determines the division of net revenues between borrower and lender, and satisfies: ¯t  rtL (st - at) /ptst, where rtL is the gross lending rate. From this definition, it is obvious that the gross lending rate and the external finance premium are independent of the firm's net worth. Thus, firms with any level of net worth, at, pay the the same external finance premium, t  rtL - 1 = ¯t/g (¯t, t) - 1. One can derive the expression for the external finance premium by combining the definition for the cutoff threshold, ¯t, together with Eq. (8). Notice that, in the case in which the mean mt varies with aggregate TFP, the lender's income share g (¯t, t) also depends on aggregate productivity. The behavior of the income share g (¯t, t) relative to the threshold value ¯t becomes critical in driving the cyclical properties of the finance premium.
Firm's maximization problem Firm i controls its current workforce nit by posting vacancies vit. I assume that new matches at firm i at the beginning of period t are proportional to the ratio of its vacancies to total vacancies posted, vit/vt, so that vitmt/vt = vitµ (t) is hiring by firm i. Evolution of employment at firm i can then be written as

nit = (1 - x) nit-1 + vitµ (t) .

(9)

Period-t workforce is the sum of the number of last period's surviving workers, (1 - x)nit-1, and new hires, vitµ (t).
Let t,t+1 be the firm's stochastic discount factor between period t and t + 1, where  is the household's subjective discount factor and t,t+1 is defined later below. The stochastic discount factor, capital rental prices and wages are taken as exogenous by the firm when choosing employment and capital.14 Taking the debt contract outcome as given, the firm's
13This aggregation result is a natural implication of the CRS assumptions in the monitoring technology and the firm's production function. Since the description of firm's maximization problem and the Nash-wage bargaining follow below, I keep the firm-specific subscripts for now.
14Assuming that firms take wages as exogenous when choosing employment allows me to ignore an additional complexity. If Nash-bargained wages depend on the marginal product of labor, large firms, as in the current framework, would have an incentive to overhire. The reason behind is the motive to weaken incum-
9

problem can be written as:

Jit = max kit ,vit ,nit

mttkitni1t- - pt (wtnit + rtkit + mttvit) + Et {t,t+1Jit+1}

(10)

subject to the employment constraint Eq. (9). The Et symbol denotes the expectation operator conditional on information available at date t.
The first-order conditions for vacancies, employment, and capital are

rt

=

 yit kitpt

,

Jn,it

=

ptmtt , µ (t)

Jn,it

=

(1

-

)

yit nit

-

ptwt

+

Et

(1

-

x) {t,t+1Jn,it+1} .

(11) (12) (13)

After the period t shock, t, is realized, both households and entrepreneurs supply their stock of capital. Thus, total beginning-of-period t capital, kt, is the sum of the two stocks of capital. Condition (11) for the firm's capital demand is equating the marginal product of capital to the rental rate. Notice that capital rental price will be below its marginal product, because of the agency cost mark-up.
The first-order condition with respect to vacancies is given by Eq. (12), while the discounted stream of expected future profits per worker, Jn,it, is given by Eq. (13). Combining (12) and (13) yields the job creation condition

ptmtt µ (t)

=

(1

-

)

yit nit

-

ptwt

+

Et(1

-

x)

t,t+1

pt+1mt+1t+1 µ (t+1)

.

(14)

Condition (14) equates the marginal cost of hiring a worker with the marginal benefit.

The latter is given on the right hand side, which consists of the net flow profit per worker

(1 - ) yit/nit-ptwt and a measure of the future value of the job Et(1-x)

 pt+1mt+1t+1

t,t+1

µ(t+1)

.

Entrepreneur's capital accumulation

At the end of the period, after all other economic decisions have been made, all production

input plus rental costs paid, the entrepreneur has ptsitf (¯it, t) units of output that he can either transfer back to the household, it, or accumulate as capital, zit+1, for use as collateral

bent workers' bargaining power (where the term 'bargaining power' is used loosely in the sense that the Nash bargaining parameter is hold fixed). This would imply a wage wt that at the margin is endogenous to the firms's level of employment. See Stole and Zwiebel (1996) for a general discussion. Krause and Lubik (2007) show that this additional effect has only small effects on the dynamic behaviour of labor search models.

10

in next period's contract. The entrepreneur maximizes the following utility function:


E0 ()t {0,tit} ,
t=0

0 <  < 1,

(15)

to the sequence of budget constraints:

it + zit+1  ptsitf (¯it, t) ,

(16)

where 0,t is the time-t household's subjective discount factor. Note that the entrepreneur discounts utility at a higher rate, , than the household. This intertemporal problem renders the following Euler equation:

1 = Et

{t,t+1 [rt+1 + (1 - )]}

pt+1f (¯it+1, t+1) 1 - pt+1g (¯it+1, t+1)

.

(17)

The right-hand side of Eq. (17) is the expected discounted rate of return for an entrepreneur who is not bankrupt in period t. The term in the second curly brackets is the safe rate of return on capital (i.e., the one gained by the households). The term in the third curly brackets is the return on internal funds, which can be shown to strictly exceed unity for all t. That is, entrepreneurs earn a higher intertemporal rate of return on saving than do households. As a result, entrepreneurs with the same discount rate as households would save at a higher rate, eventually accumulating enough capital so that they have no need to borrow from financial markets. The assumption,  < 1 insures that the entrepreneurs never hold enough wealth to overcome the financing constraints.

2.2 Households
In the presence of unemployment risk, one may observe differences in consumption levels between employed and unemployed consumers. However, under the assumption of perfect insurance markets, consumption is equalized across consumers. This is equivalent to assuming the existence of a large representative household, as in Merz (1995). The household pools incomes and allocates consumption in period t, in order to maximize the sum of household utility, and so equalizes the marginal utility of consumption across individuals. With additive separability between consumption and leisure, this implies the household equalizes

11

consumption across individuals. The lifetime utility of household j is given by


E0 t {log (cjt) - njt} , 0 <  < 1,
t=0

(18)

where cjt is consumption,  > 0 is the relative disutility of work, and njt the number of employed workers. Notice that the household supplies inelastically workers to the market, i.e., the household effectively has an infinite Frisch elasticity of labor supply.
Each period, the household allocates its wealth to purchases of consumption goods and to accumulation of capital. It has the following sources of income: wage bills, capital rentals, interest income on deposit holdings, dt, and transfers from the firms, jt. The household faces the period-by-period intertemporal budget constraint:

cjt + kjt+1  wtnjt + [rt + (1 - )] kjt + rtD - 1 dt + jt.

(19)

As explained above, the financial intermediaries pay the household a zero rate of return rtD - 1 = 0 on deposits because the household has no alternative use of its funds over the short time span when firms requires financing.
Household's employment evolves according to the following law of motion:

njt = (1 - x) njt-1 + l (t) (1 - njt-1) .

(20)

The household's welfare criterion from Eq. (18) can be rewritten as

Hjt = max {log (cjt) - njt + Et {Hjt+1}} . cj t ,kj t+1 ,nj t

(21)

The household optimizes its life-time utility (21) by choosing consumption and capital to accumulate subject to the household budget constraint (19). Denote jt the time-t Lagrange multiplier on the flow budget constraint. The following optimality conditions must hold:

jt = (cjt)-1 , 1 = Et {jt,t+1 [rt+1 + (1 - )]} ,

(22) (23)

with the addition of (19) holding with equality. Denote jt,t+1 = jt+1/jt the household's pricing kernel between periods t and t + 1. Eq. (22) defines the marginal utility of consumption at period t, jt. Eq. (23) is the Euler condition for household's capital accumu-

12

lation. It states that the household prefers expected marginal utility to be constant across time periods, unless the expected gross real return on capital, Et [rt+1 + (1 - )], exceeding household's time preference induces it to lower its consumption today relative to the future.
Using the envelope condition for employment, I derive the marginal value to the household of having one member employed rather than unemployed, Hn,jt, which is a determinant of the bargaining problem:

Hn,jt = jtwt -  + Et (1 - x - l (t+1)) {Hn,jt+1} .

(24)

The worker's contribution to the welfare of his household is given by the real wage (in utils), minus labor disutility, plus the future value of the job conditional on non-separation, minus the value this worker would contribute if he searched for another job.

2.3 Wage Bargaining
I assume, as in most of the labor search literature, that worker and firm bargain over wage at the individual level over the joint surplus of their match, Sn,t = Jn,t + Hn,t, according to the Nash bargaining solution. Given that in equilibrium all firms and workers behave similarly I can drop the i and j subscripts. The wage wt maximizes the weighted geometric average of the gains from trade, wt = arg max (Jn,t)1- (Hn,t), where 0 <  < 1 is the
wt
worker's bargaining power in the wage negotiation process. If there are no gains from trade, the worker becomes unemployed. The first-order condition of the Nash product is:

 Jn,t = (1 - ) Hn,t . pt t

(25)

Substituting the expressions for Jn,t and Hn,t (Eq. (13) and Eq. (24)) in the sharing rule (25), and using Eq. (12), it is straightforward to show that the wage that solves the bargaining problem is given by

wt = 

(1

-

)

yt ntpt

+ Et

{t,t+1mt+1t+1t+1t+1}

+ (1 - )  , t

(26)

where

t+1

=

1-x Et{l(t+1)}

Et

pt+1 pt

- 1 + 1 is a composite term that depends on the current

and the expected future mark-ups.

A few remarks concerning the wage rule condition are in order. Eq. (26) states that

the bargained wage is a weighted average of two components, with the weight on the first

component equal to worker's bargaining power. The first component is the marginal con-

13

tribution to the match (MCM) (the marginal revenue product of labor (MRPL), i.e., the marginal product of labor divided by the mark-up, augmented with the discounted savings in future hiring costs that result from having to hire fewer workers the following period). The second component is the marginal cost of work activity (in consumption units), i.e., the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and leisure (MRS). The bargaining weight, dividing the joint surplus of the match, determines how close the wage is to either the MCM or to the MRS.
A second point concerns the influence of agency costs on the wage level. Similar to the capital rental rate, the price of labor is below its level in a setup that lacks financial frictions. Namely, the weighted average of the MCM and the MRS is lower because of the presence of the agency cost mark-up. Finally, it is obvious that the composite term, t+1, captures the forward-looking aspect of employment. Namely, it takes into account how the difference between current and future financial conditions affects the cost of replacing a worker. Notice that in the absence of agency costs ( = 0 for all t), Eq. (26) reduces to a Nash-wage schedule in a model that lacks financing constraints.

2.4 Market Clearing

In a competitive equilibrium, all agents' optimality conditions are satisfied and all markets

clear. I assume a symmetric equilibrium throughout, which entails identical choices for all

variables. Defining aggregates as the averages of firm specific variables, equilibrium in the

labor market requires that

1
nt = nit = nitdi.
0

Aggregate capital, the sum of households' and entreprenuers' capital, follows

(27)

kt+1 = (1 - )kt + it. Furthermore, loans must be equal to deposits,

(28)

st - at = dt.

(29)

Using the household budget contraint and definitions for firms' profits, the resulting aggregate income identity is:

yt(1 - F (¯t, t)) = ct + it + mttvt.

(30)

14

Equilibrium in the goods market requires that the production of goods be allocated to private consumption by households and investment. Final amount of consumption and investment is reduced due to the presence of costs that originate from monitoring and from hiring activities (i.e., the presence of both financing constraints and labor market imperfections endogenously distorts aggregate production).

3 Steady state
Before turning to the results in this section I briefly discuss: (a) how the parameter values are chosen and (b) the steps of determining the long-run equilibrium.

3.1 Calibration

I calibrate the model to the U.S. using data from 1951:q1 to 2010:q1. Data are taken from

the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the Conference Board, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis'

database FRED®II and National Income and Product Accounts Tables. Data is described

in Appendix, Section B. I use the Hodrick-Prescott filter with a conventional filter weight of

1,600 to extract the business cycle component from the data in logs.

The time unit of the model is meant to be a month in order to properly capture the

high rate of job finding in U.S. data. The calibrated parameter values and the targets are

summarized in Table 1. Some implied steady state values in the 'output' economy are given

in Table 2.

I

set

the

subjective

discount

factor

to



=

1.04-

1 12

,

yielding

an

annual

real

interest

rate

of 4 percent. In line with the evidence reported in Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997), I set 

equal to 0.25 and the average monthly bankruptcy rate F (¯, 1) to 1.3%/3 (close to from the

Dun and Bradstreet data set quarterly value, .974%). I target a long-run equilibrium annual

external finance premium  = 0.02 (200 basis points), the risk premium spread on corporate

bonds estimate in Longstaff et al. (2005). By imposing E = 1, I solve numerically for 

equal to 0.749.  is set to 0.996 in order to fix the targeted annual external finance premium.

I assume that the mean of the idiosyncratic productivity is given by mt =  (t) = t1+, with spill-over parameter  equal to 2, following Faia and Monacelli (2007).

Shimer (2005) infers time series for the job finding and separation rate from BLS data

on unemployment and short term unemployment. The average monthly separation rate

is x = 0.034 while the average monthly job finding rate is l () = 0.45. With the above

two values I fix the average unemplyoment rate u to 0.07. I use the average value of the

15

Parameter Value Explanation; Target/Reference

Household sector



1.04-

1 12

time-discount factor; matches annual real rate of 4 percent;

 0.824 scaling factor to disutility of work; imposed by model's steady state;

 0.5 bargaining power of workers; conventional value;

Firm sector

z 1 technological progress; normalization;

F (¯, 1) 1.3%/3 bankruptcy rate in a period; from the Dun and Bradstreet data set;

 0.25 percent of realized project's loss in bankruptcy; Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997)

 0.996 entrepreneur's time-discount factor; match finance premium of annual 200 b.p.;

 0.749 idiosyncratic std. dev. of production; match finance premium of annual 200 b.p.;  0.5 elasticity of matches w.r.t. unemployment; Petrongolo and Pissarides (2001);

x 0.034 exogenous period rate of separation; Shimer (2005);

 0.626 hiring cost; imposed by model's steady state; ¯l 0.613 efficiency of matching; match  = 0.539;

 2 spill-over parameter;

 0.33 capital share; convention;

 0.006 capital depreciation rate; fixes capital-output ratio;

Correlation of Shocks and Size of Innovations



0.95

1 3

autocorr. of TFP shock;

z 0.0019 std. dev. of innovation to TFP shock; match 1.57% std. dev. of output;

Table 1: Parameters and their calibrated values. The Table reports calibrated parameter values. The model is calibrated to the U.S. using data from 1951:q1 to 2010:q1; see the main text for details.

Variable y u
/y c/y wn/y k/y a/s  µ() cp/

Value 5.390 0.070 0.004 0.782 0.663 3.000 0.074 0.020 0.835 0.900

Description output unemployment rate hiring costs to output ratio consumption to output ratio labor share annual capital to output ratio annual net worth to assets ratio external premium to funding job filling rate MRS to MRPL ratio

Table 2: Steady state for some variables in the 'output' economy implied by the calibration in Table 1.

16

vacancy/unemployment ratio,  = 0.539, reported in Hall (2005). This allows me to fix the efficiency of the matching function, ¯l, to 0.613. The bargaining power of the worker

is set to a conventional value of  = 0.5, to impose symmetry in the bargaining problem.

I set the elasticity of matches with respect to unemployment to  = 0.5, which is in the

range of reasonable values discussed by Petrongolo and Pissarides (2001). This choice also

guarantees that the Hosios (1990) condition for efficiency is satisfied. I fix  = 0.33 to match

the capital share of income in the National Income and Product Accounts. I set the monthly

depreciation rate  = 0.006, which pins down the annual capital-output ratio, k/y, in the

stochastic steady state to 3.

Finally, I turn to choosing = cp/, perhaps the most controversial choice (see, e.g.,

Monacelli et al., 2010). I set = 0.9 in the high side of the range of sensible values. Notice

that the calibration strategy implies that larger values for , other things equal, correspond

to smaller search frictions. With the above choice, I can fix the hiring cost parameter, , to

0.626 and the parameter governing the taste for leisure,  to 0.824.

I

set

the

autocorrelation

of

the

shock

to

productivity



=

0.95

1 3

.

I

choose

a

deviations

of

technology innovations of size z = 0.0019 in order to match the standard deviation of U.S.

GDP standard deviation of 1.57%.

3.2 The long-run equilibrium
Figure (1) shows the steps of determining the long-run equilibrium for a set of monitoring cost values (  (0.001, 0.3)) in a set of graphs in the 'output' model. The steps in pinning down analytically the long-run equilibrium are described also in Appendix A.2. The parameters correspond to those used in the calibration of the dynamic model. The upper-left graph translates the difference in the agency costs distortions into the increase in the output-capital ratio. The upper right, the middle-left and the middle-right graphs show the determination of the labor-capital and consumption-capital ratios, and of the wage respectively. Finally, the bottom-right graph calculates the increase in the net worth-assets ratio from the increase in the external finance premium.
How to interpret the graphs? For a given risk-free interest rate, increases in mark-up, p, imply larger agency costs (since the economy suffers a deadweight loss associated to the monitoring activity of the lender) and hence smaller acquired debt s - a, and in turn output project s. Larger agency costs values also imply higher consumption to output ratio, higher labor to capital ratio and lower wages.

17

Mark-up p

1.0037
1.0025
1.0013
0.0139 0.0139 0.0139 Output-capital ratio y/k

Labor-capital ratio n/k

x 10-3 4.865
4.855
4.845
0.0139 0.0139 0.0139 Output-capital ratio y/k

Consumption-output ratio c/y

0.7826
0.7823
0.0139 0.0139 0.0139 Output-capital ratio y/k

Wage w

3.8587
3.8525
3.8462
0.0139 0.0139 0.0139 Output-capital ratio y/k

Capital k

191.9 191.6 191.3

Finance premium 

187.5 125 62.5

5.392

5.396

Output y

5.4

0.02 0.04 0.06 Equity-assets ratio a/s

Figure 1: Long-run equilibrium as per-unit monitoring cost, , varies from 0.001 to 0.3. All other parameters held fixed at their benchmark values from Table 1. External finance premium reported in annual basis points; equity-assets ratio is in annual terms. The direction of arrows corresponds to direction of increase in .

18

4 Inspecting the mechanism

Financing constraints affect hiring through three distinct channels: (a) a total wage bill channel, (b) a hiring cost channel, and (c) a capital rental channel. This section builds intuition for how these channels operate.
The Nash bargaining solution, Eq. (26), can be inserted into the job creation condition, Eq. (14), to yield:

mtt = (1 - ) µ (t)

t -  pt t
+ Et

1

-

x

-

t+1l

(t+1)

pt pt+1

t,t+1

pt+1 pt

mt+1t+1 µ (t+1)

, (31)

where t = (1 - ) yt/nt. I take a log-linear approximation of Eq. (31) and write

t =

1 - 1 

1 1-

t - 1 -

ct

+

1

+ 



(2Et

{t+1}

-

t)

-

1 

Rt

+

2 

Et

t+1

-

1 - 1 

1 1 - pt + 

1-x 

(1 - ) (Et {pt+1} - pt), (32)

wage bill channel

hiring costs channel

where = p/, 1 = 1 - x - l () and 2 = (1 - x)  - l (). A hat denotes the percentage deviation of a variable from its long-run equilibrium value. Long-run equilibrium values are given without subscript. In the equation above, Rt = -Ett,t+1 is the percentage deviation of the real interest rate.
Eq. (32) reveals how a persistent increase in the TFP above trend affects the joint surplus from the marginal match and, in turn, the hiring rate. But before describing how TFP shocks affect hiring consider first how the shocks affect the external finance premium. Since net worth in the agency cost model consists of previously accumulated capital, it is essentially fixed in the period of the shock, so that the project size rises by more than does net worth. Hence, the external finance premium, and in turn the mark-up pt, must rise on impact. On the other hand, a positive feedback from aggregate TFP shock to the idiosyncratic firm productivity should cause a rise in the mean of the distribution of firm-level productivity, without changing its variance. Thus, the distribution of the idiosyncratic firm shock moves to the right. Holding constant the contractually-specified bankruptcy threshold ¯t, when the distribution F (it, t) shifts to the right, increases the possibility for any firm of drawing idiosyncratic productivity ¯it > ¯t, i.e., the equilibrium probability of the average firm going bankrupt decreases. This must translate into a fall of the external finance premium, and in

19

turn a fall of pt. The two effects counteract each other with the latter prevailing, i.e., pt fall below trend under TFP shocks (under a wide range of calibration values for ).
The increase in the TFP shocks is captured by the increase in the marginal product of labor, t, the decrease of the average cost of capital and in turn the mark-up pt, and the difference (2Et {t+1} - t) that accounts for the intertemporal change in the efficiency of hiring. The increase in the marginal product of labor raises current production and in turn consumption, ct. Since households desire a smooth consumption, they start to save. This pushes down the interest rate below trend (raises Ett,t+1), which encourages firms to invest both in capital and in hiring workers. This leads to increased employment and respectively higher market tightness, Ett+1, in the following period. The increase in employment raises the marginal product of capital, which encourages more investment, and in turn, also enables firms to spend more on hiring. Workers experience a rise in wages on account of higher productivity, labor market tightness and disutility of work (MRS). This puts downward pressure on hiring. In the long-run, employment returns to its steady state.
The importance of the financing constraints on hiring stands out immediately upon inspecting Eq. (32). Relaxing of the financing constraints during a boom frees up resources that are channeled proportionally to any of the input production costs. Respectively, looser constraints reduce the opportunity cost of resources allocated to job creation, raising the elasticity of market tightness through (a) a wage bill channel, whereby the incentives to hire rise for a given wage bill; (b) a hiring cost channel, descreasing current to future hiring costs; and (c) a capital rental channel, whereby a higher expected future capital stock (due to the increase in current investment) implies a higher marginal product of labor. Notice also that the hiring cost channel is less important for the amplification since current and future mark-ups in general cancel each other: The difference between the current and future hiring costs is not big.
To anticipate the results from the simulations, I write the Nash wage log-linear equation, Eq. (26),

 (1 - )c  wt = pw t + w ct+ w Et

t+1 + (1 + ) t+1 - Rt

-

 pw

pt

-

(1 - l()w

x)

(Et

{pt+1}

-

pt)

.

(33)

Although this is a general equilibrium environment, it is helpful to think of the equation as the partial equilibrium determinant of the wage in the 'output' model. The effect of a positive TFP shock on wage is amplified by the fall of the current mark-up, i.e., wage in the 'output'

20

model increases by more than the wages in the 'RBCM' model, a model absent financing constraints (pt = 1 for all t). The wage rise in the output model is slightly moderated by the fall of the future mark-up. Essentially, given the way wages are determined in the model and the way Nash bargaining is calibrated, wages in the 'output' model respond strongly to changes in TFP shocks so that the incentives for firms to hire do not change substantially over the business cycle compared to the 'RBCM' economy. Despite the fact that financing constraints affect hiring directly, the Nash bargaining wage overshadows the model's ability to reproduce key labor market variables.
5 Results
In this section I study the dynamic behavior of the two models, 'output' and 'RBCM' economies. I solve the models by log-linearizing the equations characterizing equilibrium around the deterministic steady state. All equilibrium equations in the 'output' economy are collected in the Appendix, subsection A.1. The resulting systems of linear rational expectations difference equations are solved using DYNARE.15 The goal is to analyze how loosening of financing constraints impacts the observed business-cycle fluctuations in real activity in general and employment in particular in response to TFP shocks of a plausible magnitude. Analysis is carried out as follows: I first compare dynamic adjustment paths towards the steady state after a TFP disturbance. Secondly, I contrast their predictions for business cycle statistics based on simulated data.
5.1 Simulation and main findings: benchmark
In this section, I analyze the dynamics of the simulated benchmark models. The impulse response function for the two model specifications are depicted in Figure 2.
Three observations stand out immediately. First, the agency cost model is able to generate simultaneously both an effect of persistence and an effect of amplification. The fall in the finance premium in two periods after impact induces output, capital and employment to rise more in the model with agency costs than in the credit frictionless economy, 'RBCM' model. Moreover the sluggish response of net worth produces an effect of persistence in the same three variables. Employment reaches its peak respectively after 6 months upon impact in the 'output' model, while in the 'RBCM' model it reaches its peak only after three periods.
15Dynare is a pre-processor and a collection of MATLAB® and GNU Octave routines which solve models with forward looking variables. See http://www.dynare.org.
21

0.2 0.18 0.16

Output y
RBCM model Output model

0.14 0.12
0.1 0.08 0.06 0.04 0.02

Capital k

2 1.5
1 0.5
0 -0.5

10 20 30 External finance premium 

40
0.25 0.2
0.15 0.1
0.05

10 20 30 Net worth a

40

10 20 30 40

10 20 30 40

Consumption c

Labor share wn/y

0.12 0.04

0.02 0.1 0

-0.02 0.08 -0.04

-0.06

0.06 -0.08

10 20 30 40

10 20 30 40

Employment rate n

Market tightness 

0.04 1.4 1.2
0.03 1

0.8 0.02
0.6
0.01 0.4

10 20 30 40

10 20 30 40

Figure 2: Response to a shock in TFP. The Figure displays percentage responses (1 in the plots corresponds to a 1% increase over the respective steady state value) of endogenous variables to a one percent shock in TFP. The time unit of the model is a month.

22

Second, and more importantly for my discussion, the responses of the labor share in the two specifications are remarkably different in terms of shape, size, and direction. To understand why first observe the behaviour of consumption. Consumption jumps up upon the impact of the shock in the two specifications. The direction of responses of consumption in the the 'output' and 'RBCM' are alike, besides the fact that in the 'output' model it jumps up more. On the other hand, the fall in the mark-up in the 'output' model is channelled into an increase of the wage, i.e., reduction of financing costs in boom are translated at large into wage increases. Together with the increase of consumption, wages in the 'output' model become highly procyclical and more volatile than wages in the 'RBCM' model.
Third, neither of the two models is able to replicate the volatility of employment and labor market tightness. This result is manifestation of the findings in Shimer (2005): The Nash wage absorbs most of the increases in productivity. On top of that, in the 'output' model, it absorbs the resources that are related to decreased monitoring costs (loosening of the financing constraints), thus eliminating the incentive for hiring. As a result, fluctuations in TFP shocks have little impact on the employment.
I also compare business cycles statistics computed from simulations of the two model specifications. I compare them to the business cycles statistics of their counterparts from the U.S. data. The results are reported in Table 3. The first two columns for model economies show statistics which are the theoretical, infinite sample moments of monthly variables. The last two columns for model economies show a measure more comparable to empirical estimates of these objects. They show statistics which are computed by simulating the models 1000 times for 697 monthly periods. The statistics are averages over the HP-filtered simulations. The statistics are conformation of the analysis above. To the extent that one hoped financing constraints would amplify TFP shocks on labor market variables, the results are disappointing.
5.2 Simulation and main findings: rigid wage
A lot of the new research has focused on wage determination. In a sense, the wage is indeterminant within a specified range in the models with Nash wage, i.e., there is a range of wages at which an employer and worker prefer to match rather than breakup. Loosely speaking, each will agree to any wage larger than the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and leisure but smaller than the marginal product of labor, if the alternative is breaking up. This insight has motivated many researchers, starting with Hall (2005) and Shimer (2005), to investigate the role of rigid wages in search models.
23

U.S. Theoretical

Finite Sample

economy

RBCM

Output

RBCM

Output

Relative s.d. y  k n
wn/y w c 

1.570 16.613 0.214 0.707 0.493 0.634 0.581 29.995

1.410 3.211 1.183 0.126 0.035 0.913 0.747


1.570 3.852 1.194 0.133 0.172 1.064 0.881 4.832

1.482 3.206 1.018 0.110 0.023 0.902 0.749


1.660 3.886 1.178 0.134 0.172 1.063 0.873 4.838

Correlations y,n y,wn/y y, u,v

0.792 -0.200 -0.582 -0.905

0.765 -0.521
 -0.879

0.727 0.922 -0.856 -0.905

0.762 -0.765
 -0.873

0.737 0.926 -0.863 -0.908

Autocorrelations y n 

0.839 0.877 0.706

0.990 0.991


0.992 0.993 0.819

0.990 0.991


0.992 0.993 0.828

Table 3: Business cycle properties of the U.S. economy and model economies. Statistics for the U.S. economy are computed using quarterly HP-filtered data from 1951:q1 to 2010:q1. The first two columns for model economies show statistics which are the theoretical, infinite sample moments of monthly variables. The last two columns for model economies show statistics which are computed by simulating the models 1000 times for 697 monthly periods under the baseline calibrated parameter values. The statistics are averages over the HPfiltered simulations. The standard deviations of all variables (except of output) are relative to output.

24

More formally, the Nash bargaining solution, Eq. (26), can be rewritten as a weighted average of the bargaining set limits, defined by the range of wage levels consistent with a non-negative surplus for both the worker and the firm respectively, [wt, wt]:

wt = wt + (1 - )wt,

where

wt

=

(1

-

)

yt ntpt

+Et

(1

-

x)

firm reservation

wage

MRPL

t,t+1

Jn,t+1 pt

,

wt

=

 t

-Et (1 - x - lt+1)

worker reservation

wage

MRS

t,t+1

Hn,t+1 t+1

.

Wage rigidity does not effect the efficient formation or retention of a match. But, it

influences the firms' intensity of posting vacancies since it impacts on the firms' expected

benefit from a worker. This arguement can be represented graphically with Figure 3.16 A

positive TFP shock generally affects the bargaining set in two ways: it tends to shift it

toward higher wages (as both reservation wages, wt and wt, generally increase) and it tends to increase its size (as the firms' reservation wage is more sensitive to the shock than the

workers'). Wage rigid of any type, then, acts as a drag on the wage and generally limits

its adjustment proportional to the change of the size of the bargaining set. Wage rigidity

(illustrated by the vertical dashed line, in case the wage is perfectly rigid) amplifies the

employment response to TFP shocks by allowing the firm to hold to a bigger portion of the

match surplus.

The effect of the TFP shock on the bargaining set is amplified in the presence of financing

constraints: the bargaining set moves to even higher wages and its size increases more

compared to its response in the 'RBCM' economy. Thus, financing constraints and wage

rigidity reinforce each other amplifying firms' hiring intensity by making the firm share of

the surplus even more procyclical and volatile.

I extend the model to incorporate real wage rigidity. I do this through a simple wage

adjustment rule. I distinguish between a target wage, wtT , which is determined by the Nash bargaining solution, and the actual wage, wt, which is a weighted average of the target wage

16I borrow the the reasoning and the graph from Monacelli et al. (2010), extending analysis to a model economy with financing constraints.

25

Worker reservation wage

Nash wage ( 0.5 )

Firm reservation wage

Productivity shock: under financing constraints

Productivity shock

Figure 3: Response of the bargaining sets to a shock in TFP. The Figure displays responses of the wage bargaining set in a economy with financing constraints (green horizontal line) and in a economy without financing constraints (green horizontal line) to a shock in TFP.

and last period actual wage. The rule is given by

wt = (1 - ) wtT + wt-1,

(34)

where  is a partial adjustment parameter that reflects the degree of wage rigidity. When  = 0, the actual wage corresponds to the Nash bargained wage and I recover the baseline case.
The effects of real wage rigidity on economic activity and labor market variables can be demonstrated by shutting down the wage adjustment almost entirely, i.e. by setting  = 0.95. The impulse response functions to the TFP shocks for the two model specifications are depicted in Figure 4. The qualitative responses of the endogenous variables are very close to the baseline specification. The only big difference is the response of the labor share in

26

the 'output' model. Logically, the labor share becomes less procyclical. This result can also be observed by comparing the business cycles statistics computed from simulations of the two model specifications to their counterparts from the U.S. data. The results are reported in Table 4. The rigid wage 'RBCM' model cannot replicate the observed patterns of the labor share and enough volatility of labor market tightness, jointly. The correlation between labor share and output and the relative standard deviation of the labor market tightness in the data are -0.200 and 16.613, respectively. By varying  I find that a fairly high degree of rigidity is needed,  = 0.99, to replicate volatility of labor market tightness in the data, whereas the model requires a high degree of flexibility,  = 0.2, to explain the correlation between labor share and output. On the contrary, high levels of rigidity in the 'output' model,  = 0.99, are consistent with both the labor market tightness (even overshooting it) and the negative comovement of labor share and output. The joint presence of wage rigidity and financing constraints is important for the dynamics of the labor market, as they reinforce each other to amplify the effect of TFP shocks on labor market quantities, while aligning the simulated comovement of labor share and output with its counterpart in the data.
6 Conclusion
I have studied a model in which shocks to aggregate TFP lead to large fluctuations in labor markets, and the amplification is mediated through financial conditions under some degree of wage rigidity. Financial constraints per se can not help to generate the empirical labor market statistics due to the Nash bargaining wage. I conclude that the main substantive contribution of search models with financing constraints relies on the presence of matchspecific rents and the opportunity for a richer set of wage setting processes. This is where the contribution of the financing constraints in the current framework lies: financial conditions lead to a much larger set of match-specific rents. Allegedly, the joint presence of the two frictions can be helpful in explaining even complicated phenomenon as the Great Depression.
27

0.3 0.25
0.2 0.15

Output y
RBCM model Output model

0.15 0.1
0.05

10 20 30 External finance premium 

40

Capital k

10 20 30 Net worth a

40

2 0.3 1 0.2 0 0.1

10 20 30 Consumption c

40

10 20 30 Labor share wn/y

40

0.12 0

0.1 0.08 0.06
0.15 0.1
0.05

10 20 30 Employment rate n

-0.05
-0.1
40
6 5 4 3 2 1

10 20 30 Market tightness 

40

10 20 30 40

10 20 30 40

Figure 4: Response to a shock in TFP with rigid wages,  = 0.95. The Figure displays percentage responses (1 in the plots corresponds to a 1% increase over the respective steady state value) of endogenous variables to a one percent shock in TFP. The time unit of the model is a month.

28

U.S. Theoretical

Finite Sample

economy

RBCM

Output

RBCM

Output

Relative s.d. y  k n
wn/y w c 

1.570 16.613 0.214 0.707 0.493 0.634 0.581 29.995

1.628 10.119 0.962 0.332 0.144 0.793 0.695


1.806 12.691 1.125 0.398 0.148 0.928 0.816 4.558

1.644 10.014 0.979 0.328 0.142 0.798 0.706


1.849 12.625 1.118 0.397 0.147 0.929 0.812 4.550

Correlations y,n y,wn/y y, u,v

0.792 -0.200 -0.582 -0.905

0.611 -0.635
 -0.660

0.603 0.418 -0.807 -0.708

0.602 -0.631
 -0.657

0.604 0.434 -0.817 -0.717

Autocorrelations y n 

0.839 0.877 0.706

0.985 0.966


0.987 0.973 0.718

0.986 0.966


0.988 0.973 0.733

Table 4: Business cycle properties of the U.S. economy and model economies with rigid wage ( = 0.95). Statistics for the U.S. economy are computed using quarterly HP-filtered data from 1951:q1 to 2010:q1. The first two columns for model economies show statistics which are the theoretical, infinite sample moments of monthly variables. The last two columns for model economies show statistics which are computed by simulating the models 1000 times for 697 monthly periods under the baseline calibrated parameter values. The statistics are averages over the HP-filtered simulations. The standard deviations of all variables (except of output) are relative to output.

29

References
Daron Acemoglu. Credit market imperfections and persistent unemployment. European Economic Review, 45(4-6):665­679, May 2001.
David Andolfatto. Business cycles and labor-market search. The American Economic Review, 86(1):112­132, 1996.
Ben Bernanke and Mark Gertler. Agency costs, net worth, and business fluctuations. American Economic Review, 79(1):14­31, March 1989.
Ben S. Bernanke, Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist. The financial accelerator in a quantitative business cycle framework. In J. B. Taylor and M. Woodford, editors, Handbook of Macroeconomics. Elsevier, 1999.
Olivier Blanchard and Jordi Galí. Labor markets and monetary policy: A new-keynesian model with unemployment. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series, No. 13897, 2008.
Charles T. Carlstrom and Timothy S. Fuerst. Agency costs, net worth, and business fluctuations: A computable general equilibrium analysis. American Economic Review, 87(5): 893­910, December 1997.
Charles T. Carlstrom and Timothy S. Fuerst. Agency costs and business cycles. Economic Theory, 12(3):583­597, 1998.
Sanjay K. Chugh. Costly external finance and labor market dynamics. Technical report, University of Maryland, 2009.
Vasco Cúrdia and Michael Woodford. Credit spreads and monetary policy. NBER Working Papers 15289, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, 2009.
Ester Faia and Tommaso Monacelli. Optimal interest rate rules, asset prices, and credit frictions. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 31(10):3228­3254, October 2007.
Douglas Gale and Martin Hellwig. Incentive-compatible debt contracts: The one-period problem. Review of Economic Studies, 52(4):647­63, October 1985.
Mark Gertler and Peter Karadi. A model of unconventional monetary policy. Technical report, 2009.
30

Mark Gertler and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. Financial intermediation and credit policy in business cycle analysis. Handbook of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.
Simon Gilchrist, Vladimir Yankov, and Egon Zakrajsek. Credit market shocks and economic fluctuations: Evidence from corporate bond and stock markets. Journal of Monetary Economics, 56(4):471­493, May 2009.
Joao F. Gomes, Amir Yaron, and Lu Zhang. Asset prices and business cycles with costly external finance. Review of Economic Dynamics, 6(4):767­788, October 2003.
Bruce C. Greenwald and Joseph E. Stiglitz. Asymmetric information and the new theory of the firm: Financial constraints and risk behavior. American Economic Review, 80(2): 160­65, May 1990.
Marcus Hagedorn and Iourii Manovskii. The cyclical behavior of equilibrium unemployment and vacancies revisited. American Economic Review, 98(4):1692­1706, September 2008.
Robert E. Hall. Employment fluctuations with equilibrium wage stickiness. American Economic Review, 95(1):50­65, March 2005.
Arthur J. Hosios. On the efficiency of matching and related models of search and unemployment. The Review of Economic Studies, 57(2):279­298, 1990.
Glenn R. Hubbard. Capital-market imperfections and investment. Journal of Economic Literature, 36(1):193­225, March 1998.
Nobuhiro Kiyotaki and John Moore. Credit cycles. Journal of Political Economy, 105(2): 211­48, April 1997.
Michael Krause and Thomas A. Lubik. Does intra-firm bargaining matter for business cycle dynamics? Discussion Paper Series 1: Economic Studies 2007,17, Deutsche Bundesbank, Research Centre, 2007.
Francis A. Longstaff, Sanjay Mithal, and Eric Neis. Corporate yield spreads: Default risk or liquidity? new evidence from the credit default swap market. Journal of Finance, 60(5): 2213­2253, October 2005.
Monika Merz. Search in the labor market and the real business cycle. Journal of Monetary Economics, 36(2):269­300, November 1995.
31

Tommaso Monacelli, Roberto Perotti, and Antonella Trigari. Unemployment fiscal multipliers. Technical report, IGIER, 2010.
Dale T. Mortensen and Christopher A. Pissarides. Job creation and job destruction in the theory of unemployment. Review of Economic Studies, 61(3):397­415, 1994.
John Nash. Two-person cooperative games. Econometrica, 21(1):128­140, 1953.
Barbara Petrongolo and Christopher A. Pissarides. Looking into the black box: A survey of the matching function. Journal of Economic Literature, 39(2):390­431, June 2001.
Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau. Credit, vacancies and unemployment fluctuations. Technical report, Carnegie Mellon University, 2009.
Christopher A. Pissarides. Short-run equilibrium dynamics of unemployment, vacancies, and real wages. American Economic Review, 75 (4):676­690, 1985.
Edward C. Prescott, Alexander Ueberfeldt, and Simona E. Cociuba. U.s. hours and productivity behavior using cps hours worked data: 1947-iii to 2009-iii. Technical report, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, 2009.
Richard Rogerson and Robert Shimer. Search in macroeconomic models of the labor market. Handbook of Labor Economics, 4, forthcoming.
Robert Shimer. The cyclical behavior of equilibrium unemployment and vacancies. American Economic Review, 95(1):25­49, 2005.
Robert Shimer. Labor Markets and Business Cycles. Princeton University Press, 2010.
Lars A. Stole and Jeffrey Zwiebel. Organizational design and technology choice under intrafirm bargaining. American Economic Review, 86(1):195­222, March 1996.
Robert M. Townsend. Optimal contracts and competitive markets with costly state verification. Journal of Economic Theory, 21(2):265­293, October 1979.
Etienne Wasmer and Philippe Weil. The macroeconomics of labor and credit market imperfections. The American Economic Review, 94(4):944­963, 2004.
Stephen D. Williamson. Costly monitoring, loan contracts, and equilibrium credit rationing. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102(1):135­45, February 1987.
32

Technical Appendix

A Analysis

A.1 Collecting equations: 'output' model

In equilibrium the household chooses plans to maximize its utility, the firm and the financial intermediary solve their maximization problems. The equations characterizing the equilibrium for the 'output' model are ("H": the first-order condition for the household; "F": the first-order conditions for the firm, the conditions for the debt contract, production function, evolution of net worth, evolution of entrepreneur's capital stock, respectively; "K": evolution of aggregate capital stock; "M": market clearing condition; "W": the wage bargaining rule; "L": evolution of aggregate employment, market tightness, job-filling rate, respectively; and "A": an auxiliary variable)

H:

1 = Et

ct ct+1

[rt+1

+

(1

-

)]

,

F: 1 = Et

ct ct+1

[rt+1

+

(1

-

)]

pt+1f (¯t+1, t+1) 1 - pt+1g (¯t+1, t+1)

,

F:

mtt µ (t)

=

(1

-

)

yt ntpt

-

wt

+

Et(1

-

x)

ct pt+1 mt+1t+1 ct+1 pt µ (t+1)

,

F:

ptf

(¯t, t)

=

f g

(¯t, t) (¯t, t)

[ptg (¯t, t) - 1] ,

F: yt = ptat [1/ (1 - ptf (¯t, t))] ,

F: yt = mttktn1t -,

F: at = zt [(1 - ) + rt] ,

F: zt+1 = ytf (¯t, t) - t,

K: kt+1 = (1 - )kt + it,

M: yt(1 - F (¯t, t)) = ct + it + mttvt,

W:

wt = 

(1

-

)

yt ntpt

+

Et

ct ct+1

mt+1t+1

t+1t+1

+ (1 - )ct,

L: nt = (1 - x) nt-1 + tµ (t) (1 - nt-1) ,

L:

t

=

1

vt - nt-1

,

L: µ (t) = ¯lt-,

A:

t

=

1-x tµ (t)

pt - 1 pt-1

+ 1.

33

The above equations determine the evolution of quantities (c, y, , v, n, k, z, a, ), prices

(p, r, w), the job-filling rate (µ ()), the default threshold (¯), and an auxiliary variable ().

Note that there are 15 equations for 15 variables, plus the equation for the exogenous TFP

process

log t =  log t-1 + t, t iid N 0, 2 .

A.2 Long-run equilibrium
Some of the results in this subsection are generally useful for examining the impact of agency costs on the long-run equilibrium allocations. Below I shortly list derivation of some main long-run ratios for the 'output' model. The analysis of the 'investment' model is symmetric.
Given the household's preferences in Eq. (19), the risk-free return on capital is

R = 1/,

thereby relating  to observations on R. The log-normal pdf has two parameters, the variance of log  and the mean of . I
fix the long-run mean to unity, E = 1, and then calibrate the steady state value of the

variance so that, in the long-run equilibrium, F (¯, 1) is equal to a specified calibrated value. By imposing E = 1, the idiosyncratic productivity disturbance t has a log-normal distribution:
log t  N -0.52 , 2 .

In the long-run equilibrium, the firm's share of output is f (¯, 1) 

 ¯

dF

(,

1)

-

¯ (1 - F (¯, 1)). The financial intermediary's share of output is g (¯, 1) 

¯ 0

dF

(,

1)

-

F (¯, 1) + ¯ (1 - F (¯, 1)). Then, the derivatives of the shares with respect to ¯ are:

f ¯ (¯, 1) = - (1 - F (¯, 1)) , g¯ (¯, 1) = -f ¯ (¯, 1) -  (¯, 1) ,

where the density function is  (¯, 1) = F ¯ (¯, 1). After imposing E = 1, I substitute the mark-up p, from Eq. (7),
pf (¯, 1) = f (¯, 1) [pg (¯, 1) - 1] g (¯, 1)
34

into Eq. (17),

pf (¯, 1) 1 =  R 1 - pg (¯, 1) ,

and targeting a given long-run equilibrium annual external finance premium , I solve nu-

merically for the variance of log .

The long-run value of the output-capital ratio, y/k, from combining Eq. (11) and Eq.

(23), is given by

y/k = p (R - 1 + ) /,

which in turn implies the labor-capital ratio

1
n/k = (y/k) 1- .

From Eq. (20), the long-run employment rate satisfies

n = l () / (x + l ()) ,

which in turn allows to pin down the long-run values of capital and output. Next, I fix , and using Eq. (20) and Eq. (31), I find the hiring costs to output ratio

v (1 - ) (1 - ) (1 - ) x

= y

1 - 1

,

which, in turn from Eq. (30), pins down the consumption-output ratio

c

= 1 - F

(¯, 1) -  k

-

v .

y yy

Finally, I can find the net worth and the wage from Eq. (8) and Eq. (26), respectively.

B Data
I discuss how I obtain the macroeconomic time series for the real economy, from 1951:q1 up to 2010:q1, each of which has a theoretical counterpart in the present paper. The data is identical to one used by Shimer (2010).
· Output y: I use a quantity-weighted measure of real Gross Domestic Product, National Income and Product Accounts Table 1.1.3, line 1. I express this in per capita terms, dividing by the population series from Prescott et al. (2009).
35

· Vacancy-unemployment ratio : I proxy the number of open vacancies v with the Conference Board help-wanted advertising index, available from the Conference Board. I divide this by the number of unemployed workers u, series LNS13000000 drawn from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
· Consumption c: I use a quantity-weighted measure of real consumption of nondurables and services, National Income and Product Accounts Table 1.1.3, Rows 5 and 6. I express this in per capita terms, dividing by the population series from Prescott et al. (2009).
· Capital stock k: I measure the capital stock using the Bureau of Economic Analysis's Fixed Asset Table 1.1, line 1. This is an annual series, which I interpolate. I divide by the population series from Prescott et al. (2009).
· Labor share wn/y: I measure the labor share using National Income and Product Accounts Table 1.10. Labor income is taken from line 2. Capital income is consumption of fixed capital (line 23) plus net operating surplus of private enterprises (line 11) minus proprietors' income (line 15). Labor share is labor income divided by the sum of labor and capital income.
· Employment n: I use the measure of employment from Prescott et al. (2009), divided by population from the same paper.
· Labor compensation w: Real wages are measured by the labor share wn/y divided by employment n and multiplied by output y.
· The external finance premium : The premium is measured by the difference between Moody's BAA corporate bond yields and 3-Month Treasury Bill (TB3MS), available from Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis' database FRED®II.
36

SFB 649 Discussion Paper Series 2010
For a complete list of Discussion Papers published by the SFB 649, please visit http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de.
001 "Volatility Investing with Variance Swaps" by Wolfgang Karl Härdle and Elena Silyakova, January 2010.
002 "Partial Linear Quantile Regression and Bootstrap Confidence Bands" by Wolfgang Karl Härdle, Ya'acov Ritov and Song Song, January 2010.
003 "Uniform confidence bands for pricing kernels" by Wolfgang Karl Härdle, Yarema Okhrin and Weining Wang, January 2010.
004 "Bayesian Inference in a Stochastic Volatility Nelson-Siegel Model" by Nikolaus Hautsch and Fuyu Yang, January 2010.
005 "The Impact of Macroeconomic News on Quote Adjustments, Noise, and Informational Volatility" by Nikolaus Hautsch, Dieter Hess and David Veredas, January 2010.
006 "Bayesian Estimation and Model Selection in the Generalised Stochastic Unit Root Model" by Fuyu Yang and Roberto Leon-Gonzalez, January 2010.
007 "Two-sided Certification: The market for Rating Agencies" by Erik R. Fasten and Dirk Hofmann, January 2010.
008 "Characterising Equilibrium Selection in Global Games with Strategic Complementarities" by Christian Basteck, Tijmen R. Daniels and Frank Heinemann, January 2010.
009 "Predicting extreme VaR: Nonparametric quantile regression with refinements from extreme value theory" by Julia Schaumburg, February 2010.
010 "On Securitization, Market Completion and Equilibrium Risk Transfer" by Ulrich Horst, Traian A. Pirvu and Gonçalo Dos Reis, February 2010.
011 "Illiquidity and Derivative Valuation" by Ulrich Horst and Felix Naujokat, February 2010.
012 "Dynamic Systems of Social Interactions" by Ulrich Horst, February 2010.
013 "The dynamics of hourly electricity prices" by Wolfgang Karl Härdle and Stefan Trück, February 2010.
014 "Crisis? What Crisis? Currency vs. Banking in the Financial Crisis of 1931" by Albrecht Ritschl and Samad Sarferaz, February 2010.
015 "Estimation of the characteristics of a Lévy process observed at arbitrary frequency" by Johanna Kappusl and Markus Reiß, February 2010.
016 "Honey, I'll Be Working Late Tonight. The Effect of Individual Work Routines on Leisure Time Synchronization of Couples" by Juliane Scheffel, February 2010.
017 "The Impact of ICT Investments on the Relative Demand for HighMedium-, and Low-Skilled Workers: Industry versus Country Analysis" by Dorothee Schneider, February 2010.
018 "Time varying Hierarchical Archimedean Copulae" by Wolfgang Karl Härdle, Ostap Okhrin and Yarema Okhrin, February 2010.
019 "Monetary Transmission Right from the Start: The (Dis)Connection Between the Money Market and the ECB's Main Refinancing Rates" by Puriya Abbassi and Dieter Nautz, March 2010.
020 "Aggregate Hazard Function in Price-Setting: A Bayesian Analysis Using Macro Data" by Fang Yao, March 2010.
021 "Nonparametric Estimation of Risk-Neutral Densities" by Maria Grith, Wolfgang Karl Härdle and Melanie Schienle, March 2010.

SFB 649 Discussion Paper Series 2010
For a complete list of Discussion Papers published by the SFB 649, please visit http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de.
022 "Fitting high-dimensional Copulae to Data" by Ostap Okhrin, April 2010. 023 "The (In)stability of Money Demand in the Euro Area: Lessons from a
Cross-Country Analysis" by Dieter Nautz and Ulrike Rondorf, April 2010. 024 "The optimal industry structure in a vertically related market" by
Raffaele Fiocco, April 2010. 025 "Herding of Institutional Traders" by Stephanie Kremer, April 2010. 026 "Non-Gaussian Component Analysis: New Ideas, New Proofs, New
Applications" by Vladimir Panov, May 2010. 027 "Liquidity and Capital Requirements and the Probability of Bank Failure"
by Philipp Johann König, May 2010. 028 "Social Relationships and Trust" by Christine Binzel and Dietmar Fehr,
May 2010. 029 "Adaptive Interest Rate Modelling" by Mengmeng Guo and Wolfgang Karl
Härdle, May 2010. 030 "Can the New Keynesian Phillips Curve Explain Inflation Gap
Persistence?" by Fang Yao, June 2010. 031 "Modeling Asset Prices" by James E. Gentle and Wolfgang Karl Härdle,
June 2010. 032 "Learning Machines Supporting Bankruptcy Prediction" by Wolfgang Karl
Härdle, Rouslan Moro and Linda Hoffmann, June 2010. 033 "Sensitivity of risk measures with respect to the normal approximation
of total claim distributions" by Volker Krätschmer and Henryk Zähle, June 2010. 034 "Sociodemographic, Economic, and Psychological Drivers of the Demand for Life Insurance: Evidence from the German Retirement Income Act" by Carolin Hecht and Katja Hanewald, July 2010. 035 "Efficiency and Equilibria in Games of Optimal Derivative Design" by Ulrich Horst and Santiago Moreno-Bromberg, July 2010. 036 "Why Do Financial Market Experts Misperceive Future Monetary Policy Decisions?" by Sandra Schmidt and Dieter Nautz, July 2010. 037 "Dynamical systems forced by shot noise as a new paradigm in the interest rate modeling" by Alexander L. Baranovski, July 2010. 038 "Pre-Averaging Based Estimation of Quadratic Variation in the Presence of Noise and Jumps: Theory, Implementation, and Empirical Evidence" by Nikolaus Hautsch and Mark Podolskij, July 2010. 039 "High Dimensional Nonstationary Time Series Modelling with Generalized Dynamic Semiparametric Factor Model" by Song Song, Wolfgang K. Härdle, and Ya'acov Ritov, July 2010. 040 "Stochastic Mortality, Subjective Survival Expectations, and Individual Saving Behavior" by Thomas Post and Katja Hanewald, July 2010. 041 "Prognose mit nichtparametrischen Verfahren" by Wolfgang Karl Härdle, Rainer Schulz, and Weining Wang, August 2010. 042 "Payroll Taxes, Social Insurance and Business Cycles" by Michael C. Burda and Mark Weder, August 2010. 043 "Meteorological forecasts and the pricing of weather derivatives" by Matthias Ritter, Oliver Mußhoff, and Martin Odening, September 2010. 044 "The High Sensitivity of Employment to Agency Costs: The Relevance of Wage Rigidity" by Atanas Hristov, September 2010.

