BERLIN

SFB 6 4 9 E C O N O M I C R I S K

SFB 649 Discussion Paper 2011-011
Human Capital Formation on Skill-Specific Labor Markets
Runli Xie*
* Humboldt-Universit‰t zu Berlin, Germany
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".
http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de ISSN 1860-5664
SFB 649, Humboldt-Universit‰t zu Berlin Spandauer Straﬂe 1, D-10178 Berlin

Human Capital Formation on Skill-Specific Labor Markets
Runli Xie This draft: February, 2011
Abstract This paper focuses on the dynamic link between skill-specific labor markets with search frictions. Human capital investment is formed through households' endogenous decision, and competes with physical capital investment. Idiosyncratic shock shifts the skilled labor share and changes tightness in both skilled and unskilled markets. Given inelastic labor participation, the model can generate downward-sloping Beveridge curves in aggregate, skilled and unskilled labor markets. Upon a neutral shock, total unemployment decrease is two-staged: firstly with a reduction in unskilled unemployment, and then due to a sharp decline of skilled unemployment when skill substitution dominates. A higher elasticity of substitution between two types of labor leads to higher volatility of the model variables and higher u - v correlation.
Keywords: skill-specific unemployment, human capital investment, idiosyncratic shock, skill substitution, search and matching
JEL codes: E24, E32, J24, J63
Address for correspondence: Department of Economics, Humboldt University of Berlin, Spandauer Strasse 1, 10178 Berlin, Germany. Email: xierunly@staff.hu-berlin.de. I am grateful to Michael Burda for extensive comments. This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the CRC 649 "Economic Risk".
1

1 Introduction
The cyclicality of aggregate labor market variables and the related performance of MortensenPissarides (MP) type search and matching models came into heavy debate in recent years. Early papers by Merz (1995) and Andolfatto (1996) aimed at embedding labor market frictions in real business cycle models in order to improve the cyclical properties. Shimer's (2005) seminal paper points out, that a standard MP model generates relatively low volatility of unemployment and vacancies compared to post-war U.S. data. Many research efforts afterwards focus mainly on how to fix this problem. Among others, Hall (2005a) and Costain and Reiter (2008) propose setting wages sticky as a modification, Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008) focus more on the calibration strategy and suggest a combination of low bargaining power and high home production value as the possible numerical solution, while Ebell (2008) emphasizes the participation margin and inelastic labor force participation to improve the model results.
Observing that wages in new matches are more volatile than the ongoing jobs, Pissarides (2009) examines a setup where the Nash sharing rule only holds in new jobs. While keeping the wage elasticities, he proposes to add a fixed component to the matching cost. Such modification can deliver more volatility in the job finding rate, unemployment and vacancies. Other efforts to provide an adequate explanation for observed volatility in labor-market aggregates include supplementing the model with payroll taxes and social insurance (Burda and Weder, 2010), resurrecting Calvo's (1983) staggered multiperiod price setting model (Gertler and Trigari, 2009), incorporating separation rate shocks and adjusting the value of the elasticity of the matching function (Mortensen and Nagypa¥l, 2007), and modeling a strategic wage bargaining process where the relative costs of delays to the bargaining parties are taken into account (Hall and Milgrom, 2008).
The current paper goes beyond the dynamics in aggregate labor market by exploring the relationship between skilled and unskilled labor market variables. There are two channels connecting them, one on the labor demand and the other on the labor supply side. Similar to Xie (2008) and Hagedorn, Manovskii and Stetsenko (2008), demand for skilled and unskilled
1

labor is incorporated in the production function with heterogeneous labor inputs1. Hagedorn et al. (2008) argue that the reasons for high volatility differ in skilled and unskilled unemployment. While unskilled workers experience volatility because of the small difference between their productivity and home production value, skilled workers are subject to high volatility due to capital investment shocks and the consequent changes in their productivity. They do not allow endogenous skill transition between the two markets, shutting down one important mobility channel between the skilled and unskilled labor force. If one aims to study the important variance of unemployment caused by the inter-market movement, it is necessary to allow for human capital investment and skill acquisition. This is not only highly relevant for current labor market policies, but can also help investigate aggregate unemployment from more specific angles, namely the short- and long-run effects bolstered by changes in skilled and unskilled unemployment separately.
Skilled and unskilled workers are subject to different costs over the business cycle. Krusell and Smith (1999), Mukoyama and Sahin (2006) report on considerable heterogeneity in the welfare cost of cycles among agents with different levels of wealth. The differences result from the higher unemployment risk among the unskilled and their lower ability to self-insure due to less wealth. Because this normative study aims at evaluating the welfare cost of business cycles on skill-specific workers, unemployment is modelled for simplicity as an exogenous random process and so is the flow between workers' skill status.
In the long-run, the relative unemployment rate of the unskilled increases, which, according to many, results from a demand shift toward skilled labor. This relative demand shift, however, is not adequate to explain unemployment and wage dynamics in Europe and the U.S. in the 1970s-1980s. It explains only a modest but significant part of the large rise in unemployment in some European countries. Germany presents a good example of the European training system; i.e., a strong emphasis in the schooling system and a comprehensive vocational training system. The portion of labor force with middle-level qualification is far higher in German than in the U.S., which forms a more flexible basis for the upcoming biased technology change and demand shift. This flexibility enables endogenous skill upgrade much
1One difference is that Hagedorn et al. (2008) emphasizes the capital-skill complementarity while I take the perspective of a conventional CES-nested Cobb-Douglas function where the elasticity of substitution between capital and unskilled labor is equal to that between capital and skilled labor.
2

more easily and thus even given the wage compression, there was much a smaller unskilled unemployment rate (Acemoglu and Pischke, 1999, Pischke, 2001). Pischke's (2001) study also reveals that most workplace training seems to be general and free for the workers to participate.
Training for the unemployed is prevalent in many industrialized countries and is embedded in the framework of active labor market (ALM) policies. Different types of trainings vary in the timing of the effects. A recent meta-analysis by Card, Kluve and Weber (2010) evaluating ALM policies finds that job search assistance programs have relatively favorable short-run impacts, whereas classroom and on-the-job training programs tend to show better outcomes in the medium-run than the short-run. Across the countries, short-term program impacts appear to be relatively unfavorable in the German-speaking countries, but relatively favorable in the English-speaking countries. In the medium term the differences across country groups are smaller, and in the long term the relative position of the German-speaking and Englishspeaking countries is reversed. Moreover, subsidized public sector employment programs have the least favorable impact estimates - a finding that confirms earlier studies from Heckman et al. (1999), Boone and Van Ours (2004) and Kluve(2007).
In all, training is key to human capital flows between the skill-specific labor forces by affecting the skilled and unskilled labor market structure. Several papers contribute to exploring the cyclical behavior of skill acquisition. DeJong and Ingram (2001) model training time as the representative households' endogenous decision so as to boost subsequent labor productivity. As aggregate data other than training is used to estimate the parameters of the model, the simulation results suggest skill acquisition activities to be distinctly countercyclical. Perli and Sakellaris (1998) introduce human capital into RBC type models to improve the model's ability to produce persistent output. It is due to the human capital accumulation process that labor input continues to increase after a positive technology shock, resulting in persistent output growth. A similar smoothing effect can be achieved by assuming labor adjustment costs in order to propagate shocks over time (Sepulveda, 2004). Krebs (2003a, 2003b) developed an incomplete asset market model to examine uninsurable idiosyncratic labor income risk on capital investment decisions, growth and welfare.
More recent attempts explore the role of human capital formation and skill difference in explaining labor market institution and unemployment. While in previous human capital
3

related studies unemployment is mostly assumed voluntary, Ljungqvist and Sargent (2007a, 2007b, 2008) compare the impact of unemployment insurance and employment protection on unemployment and duration in different model setups. However, no endogenous decisions are made by the workers on their own skill accumulation. Observing ALM policies gaining popularity in Europe and the U.S. (starting from the 1980s in Scandinavian countries), one may inquire their possible effects on unemployment given workers' decision in attending training programs. Admittedly, data shows that unemployed workers are engaged much too little in skill trainings and hence suffer from severe loss of their net human capital. This can raise questions on the effectiveness of existing ALM policies but does not rule out the potentials of optimal policies. The key point, in fact, is how to design good training programs, communicate the message to the unemployed workers and motivate them to take part.
A broader way to set up the problem is to allow for different degrees of human capital depreciation and examine workers' corresponding decision in human capital investment. Even if there may be little change in total labor force, the aggregation of single workers' choice in human capital investment would change the shares of skilled and unskilled labor forces, and subsequently their market tightness. This is exactly the idea of the current paper: Households' endogenous decisions regarding skill accumulation are implemented though general training and learning-by-doing, and the volume of skill-specific labor force and the respective market tightness vary correspondingly.
The theoretical model shares similarity with Krebs (2003a, 2003b) in the sense that households own and invest in two types of capital, namely physical and human capital, and human capital is subject to idiosyncratic shocks. As in Krebs (2003a, 2003b), households' labor supply is regarded in the same manner as human capital, consequently the quantity and quality of labor can not be disentangled. In the current paper these two concepts are separated into labor supply (as quantity) and skill share (as quality of labor).
My results confirm the effect of relative price and skill substitution on aggregate unemployment. Model simulation shows that aggregate unemployment is countercyclical. Given a human capital shock, firstly the unskilled unemployment declines, and then due to skill substitution skilled unemployment decreases dominantly. Total vacancies also observe a twostage response toward the shock, which sink firstly due to the dominant deduction of the unskilled vacancies, and recover shortly afterward because of the strong skilled vacancy cre-
4

ation and unskilled vacancy recovery. Further parameter variation shows that the elasticity of substitution plays an important role in the model dynamics. When skilled and unskilled workers are more likely to replace each other, the impulse responses upon the shock are enhanced and subsequently the volatilities of the variables increase. Unemployment-vacancy correlation also increases in absolute value and approaches the correlation in U.S. data.
In both skilled and unskilled labor markets, technology shocks induce changes similar to that in a single type labor model. Vacancies respond more strongly to the positive productivity shock than unemployment, and consequently market tightness and job-finding rates increase. The immediate positive impact response of unemployment is quickly reversed so that on average both skilled and unskilled unemployment remain countercyclical. Comparatively, skilled vacancies and unemployment react more intensively than their unskilled counterparts, suggesting higher sensitivity in the skilled labor market upon a technology shock. Directly after the shock, human capital investment reacts positively, just as physical capital investment. Physical capital builds up gradually as a result of increasing output, which is consistent with the result in standard RBC models. The initial response of human capital, represented by the share of skilled population, is also positive but at a much smaller scale.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 3.2 presents the theoretical model and equilibrium; Section 3.3 specifies the calibration strategy; Section 3.4 carries out the simulation and impulse response analysis; Section 3.5 discusses related policy implication on ALM policies and Section 3.6 concludes.
2 The Model
In this section a decentralized equilibrium is derived. Households are ex ante homogeneous until the idiosyncratic human capital shock occurs. The large household assumption applies and each household is composed of skilled and unskilled members, with each type searching for jobs in the segmented skill-specific labor market i (i = s denotes the skilled market and i = u the unskilled market). Through skill depreciation and households' investment in human capital, relative skill share changes. There is no mismatch of skills and job types. Households own the capital and rent it to the firms. Firms post vacancies to hire workers and produce with capital, where skilled and unskilled workers substitute each other imperfectly. The
5

structure of the model is shown in Figure 1. ti is skill-specific market tightness, vti denotes vacancies in the respective markets and
uti the unemployment stocks. As shown in Figure 1, it's in firms' production that skilled and unskilled workers interact with each other again. Firms produce with physical capital kt-1, skilled labor nst-1 and unskilled labor ntu-1. Exogenous technology shocks occur to the production process. More details of this CES nested Cobb-Douglas production function will
be discussed in subsection 3.2.3.

2.1 Search and Matching in the Labor Markets

Skilled and unskilled workers look for jobs in separate labor markets. Firms can observe

the exact skill level of the worker and workers only look for vacancies within their own skill

level. Therefore there is no mismatch of skills and job types. Both skilled and unskilled labor
markets follow the standard search and matching structure. With i = s, u, vacancies vti and stock of unemployed workers uti jointly form new job matches through a constant return to scale matching function m uit, vti = mi uit 1- vti . mi is the scaling parameter in the
matching functions and can be interpreted as the efficiency of matching. is the matching

elasticity. Labor market tightness is defined as

ti

=

vti uti

,

(1)

the probabilities that firms meet proper unemployed workers are

qti = mi ti -1 ,

(2)

while the unemployed meet proper vacancies at rates

pti = mi ti .

(3)

Within the skilled and unskilled labor markets, respectively, an employed worker can become unemployed in the next period because either her firm has exited the market with probability  or she loses her previous job in the firm with probability i. Suppose there is no correlation between these two sources of unemployment. Finally, workers lose their jobs and become unemployed at the rate i =  + i - i.

6

2.2 Households

A large household is composed of skilled and unskilled members. When the total household is normalized as 1, the share of skilled population is t-1, and 1 - t-1 is the unskilled. The structure of the labor force can change over time through natural skill depreciation and skill upgrading from training. Both skilled and unskilled workers can have three statuses: Working, being unemployed (but search for jobs) and enjoying leisure. The time constraints are summarized in the following equations:

t-1 = nst-1 + uts + lts, 1 - t-1 = nut-1 + uut + ltu

(4) (5)

where nit-1 is labor supply, uit denotes unemployment and lti-1 stands for leisure for type `i' household members.
Under such an assumption, there is a natural limit of human capital investment, and accordingly, a genuine difference to Krebs (2003a, 2003b). In Krebs' setup, households have a portfolio of risk-free physical capital and risky human capital investment. When the uninsurable idiosyncratic labor income risk declines, households (in the steady state) are induced to possess more human capital and less physical capital. As a result, the return on human capital decreases and that on physical capital rises. The total investment interest, however, increases as the expected return on risky human capital investment exceeds the return on the risk-free physical capital investment. In comparison, in the current model labor is a hybrid of conventional labor form and human capital, in the sense that labor complements capital but due to the comparatively small amount, "human capital premium" is even more substantial. Still the quantity and quality of labor can be taken apart, with labor supply representing the former, and skill share embodying the latter.
The representative household chooses consumption, human capital investment, labor supplies and search intensity for both types of labor, in order to maximize the sum of the discounted future utilities,



max
{ct ,lts ,ltu ,t

Et
}

t
t=0

[H

(ct)

+

G

(lts,

ltu)]

(6)

where ct is consumption, lts and ltu are skilled and unskilled leisure respectively, and  is

7

the common discounting factor in the economy. Both H and G are increasing and concave functions:

H (ct) = ln ct,

G (lts, ltu)

=



s

(lts

)1+

1 s

1

+

1 s

+

u

(lts

)1+

1 u

1

+

1 u

.

Parameters s and u are rough measures of the Frisch elasticity of labor supply. s and u represent weights of utility gained from leisure. The period-to-period budget constraint is

given as

wtsnst + wtuntu = ct + xt.

(7)

The left-hand side is households' income, including wages of both labor types. Meanwhile, households consume ct and invest in human capital xt. Other constraints are:

human capital evolution t = (1 -  + t) t-1 + xt + F nts-1 , (8)

skill depreciation

general upskill training

skilled labor transition nts = (1 - s) nst-1 + pst ust ,

learning by doing
(9)

unskilled labor transition ntu = (1 - u) nut-1 + put uut .

(10)

Equations (9) and (10) summarize the intertemporal transitions in skilled and unskilled labor markets separately. Equation (8) captures how human capital evolves. Skill loss happens to the skilled population at a constant rate . t is the shift in human capital level. The current share of skilled population, which can be interpreted as the human capital level of the household, stems from the undepreciated previous skilled share, human capital investment xt and new human capital formation from skilled labor activities. Note that the difference between xt and F nts-1 is that the former investment is valid for the whole population, while the latter, "learning by doing", is assumed to be particular for the skilled worker and differentiates them from the unskilled. This is also found in Burdett, Carrillo-Tudela and Coles (2009)2. xt induces new skills gained from on-the-job training and compulsory training
2Using a non-competitive labor market model with search frictions, Burdett et al. (2009) study the impact of human capital accumulation on equilibrium market outcomes. Their model emphasizes the importance of experience, and reveals that learning-by-doing increases equilibrium wage dispersion. Moreover, their numerical simulation shows that the equilibrium sorting implied by their model, namely more experienced

8

for the unemployed, and hence lumping together specific human capital (on-the-job training)

and general human capital (from unemployment training as part of the active labor mar-

ket policy). Similarly, although F nst-1 depicts the skill accumulation on the job, the skill gained can also be both general and specific. This assumption is theoretically and empir-

ically justified. Acemoglu and Pischke (1999) argue that wage compression due to market

imperfection provides firms the incentive to invest in general human capital. Pischke (2001)

finds no evidence in SOEP data on how firm-specific the trainings are in Germany, while

Loewenstein and Spletzer (1999) find surprising information from U.S. data (NLSY) that a

large part of training paid by the employers are general.

As Burdett et al. (2009) argue, learning-by-doing is relevant to the wage distribution in equilibrium. Similar to DeJong and Ingram (2001), I assume that F nst-1 = µ nts-1 . The parameter  can be either greater or smaller than 1, implying convexity or concavity of

F (∑) respectively. t can be interpreted as either a change in the population or a household-

specific shift in human capital stock a` la Krebs (2003a, 2003b). A positive shift could be

improvement of agent's health condition or having a good teacher in the training course,

helping human capital stock formation so that the household has a better chance to be

upgraded to a higher-skilled job market in next period. In contrast, a negative shift, such

as a sudden loss of firm-specific human capital due to job termination, can downgrade the

household to a less-skilled job market. Following Krebs (2003a, 2003b), I assume that t

follows an AR(1) process:

t = t-1 + et

(11)

where the unpredictable residual et is i.i.d. distributed across households and across time. The coefficient  can be understood as the persistence of the human capital shock. One can find the counterpart of this idiosyncratic income shock in the micro studies on labor income, and the setup here mirrors the permanent income shock, in the sense that agents can effectively self-insure against transitory shocks through borrowing or their own savings, and the welfare effects of such shocks are quite small (Heaton and Lucas, 1996, Levine and Zame, 2002), while permanent income variances are hardly insurable (Meghir and Pistaferri, 2004).
workers also tend to find and quit to better paid jobs, may more than double the impact of learning-by-doing on measured wage inequality.

9

Under this assumption human capital shocks can accumulate to a permanent labor income shock. Because equation (8) is the core to the structure of the labor market, how human capital exactly evolves, affects not only the steady state value but also the second moments. More detailed discussion on this issue can be found in section 3.4.2.
The first Euler equation resembles the standard intertemporal condition to allocate human capital investment optimally

1 ct = Et

(1 - 

+ t+1)

1 ct+1

+ s

lts+1

-

1 s

- u

ltu+1

-

1 u

.

(12)

The utility forgone today for human capital investment is compensated by the additional

human capital gain minus the difference between future utility in skilled leisure and unskilled

leisure, since a few unskilled workers have been upskilled into the skilled labor share.

The Euler equations for skilled and unskilled labor participation are:

u

(ltu)-

1 u

1 ptu

= Et

wtu+1 + u ct+1

ltu+1

-

1 u

1 - u - ptu+1 put+1

,

(13)



s

(lts

)-

1 s

1 pts

=

Et

µ (nts)-1 + wts+1

1 + s ct+1

lts+1

-

1 s

1 - s - pts+1 pst+1

. (14)

Current leisure forgone for the worker imposes a compound effect in the next period,

where the expected payoff is conditioned on the job realization of the additional search effort; i.e., with probability pts. With this optimal labor participation the corresponding part of the household experiences an increase in employment and thus sacrificing leisure but gaining

extra wage income. The last part of the marginal benefit of employment is the saved search

cost once the match survives. What's special of skilled workers is that through "learning by

doing", they can accumulate and utilize new human capital in the next period. The wage

gain therefore reflects this late skill accumulation. The values of current employment and unemployment are defined as Et ,i and tU,i, and
evolve as the following Bellman equations show

tE,i = wti + tEt itU+,i1 + 1 - i Et+,i1 , whereas U,i, the value of being unemployed is

tU,i = bi + tEt pitEt+,i1 + 1 - pti Ut+,i1 . 10

Though there is no direct pecuniary unemployment compensation, unemployed workers can carry out more home production bi, such as gardening work or cooking, which de facto creates value to be unemployed and relaxes households' budget constraint. t is household's stochastic discount factor and is defined as

t

=



EtHc(ct) . Hc(ct)

Defining ti = Et ,i - Ut ,i as the expected gain from change in the employment state, we reach the following recursive law of motion

it = wti - bi + 1 - i - pit tEtti+1 With this surplus, worker i will enter the later wage bargaining with the firm.

(15)

2.3 Products and Firms

There is a continuum of identical firms on the unit interval. Firms are perfectly competitive

and produce with physical capital, skilled and unskilled labor. All factors enter production

in a CES-nested Cobb-Douglas manner:

f (∑) = yt = exp (zt) kt1--1a



nts-1

-1
 + (1 - )

nut-1

-1 

a
,-1

nts-1 and ntu-1 are imperfect substitutes to each other and are augmented by a technology shock zt.
Within the compound labor input, parameters  and 1 -  measure the specific produc-

tivity level of the skilled and unskilled workers whereas  is the elasticity of substitution

between the two types of labor, and a is the output elasticity of labor.

In each period firms open as many vacancies vti as necessary in order to hire in expectation the desired number of workers for the next period, taking into account that the real cost to

opening a vacancy is i. Wages for both skilled and unskilled workers are the outcome of

wage bargaining. Firms own capital and maximize the sum of discounted future profits by

choosing optimal capital investment and vacancy posts for skilled and unskilled labor:



{vts

max
},{vtu},{kt

E0
}

t=0

tt

t

11

where the firm makes profit t from selling their output yt at a price that is normalized to one, less new capital investment and wage payment for both types of workers, as well as the costs associated with new vacancies. As mentioned above, t is the stochastic discount factor. It is imposed on the profit and capital utilization of the firm.
t = yti - it - wtinti-1 - ivti.
ii
This maximization problem is subject to:

yt

=

exp (zt) kt1--1a



nst-1

-1
 + (1 - )

nut-1

-1 

a
,-1

kt = (1 -  ) kt-1 + it,

nit = 1 - i nit-1 + qtivti,

zt = zt-1 + t.

(16) (17) (18) (19)

Capital stock evolution follows (17) where  is the capital depreciation rate. Employment

for skilled and unskilled labor develops as shown in equation (18), and the technology evolution is summarized by equation (19). The exogenous shock to technology is t  i.i.d. 0, 2 . Firms maximize their profits taking the wage curves as it is given from wage bargaining.

The Euler equation for capital investment is

1 = t

(1 - a) yt+1 + (1 -  ) kt

.

(20)

The ones concerning labor demand are:

i qti = tEt

yt+1 nit

-

wti+1

+

1 - i

i qti+1

.

(21)

The cost of posting a vacancy would be compensated by discounted future profits conditioned

on the vacancy filling probability. Once the job match succeeds, the firm profits from the

marginal product of extra labor input net of the wage payment; furthermore, if the match remains with probability (1 - s), the firm also saves the future cost to post a new vacancy.

Regarding the individual wage bargaining, what concerns the firm is the contribution of an extra worker to its value. For a vacancy of total value Vti, the marginal value of a skilled/unskilled worker is

12

Vti nti-1

=

yt nit-1

- wti

+

1 - i

i qti .

These marginal values are also the surpluses the firm uses in the bargaining.

(22)

2.4 Wage Setting
In this subsection the bargaining process is explained in detail. The representative firm treats each worker as a marginal worker and bargains with her for the wage. Nash bargaining is assumed where firm and worker choose wage together in order to maximize the (log) geometric average of their surpluses from a successful job match, whereas employment is ex post chosen by the firm to maximize profits given the bargained wage (also known as the "right to manage" bargaining model). Free-entry condition on the product market drives the firm's outside option down to zero.

wti

=

arg

max

(1

-

)

ln(

Vti nit-1

)

+



ln

ti ,

subject to the firm's surplus (22) and the respective worker's surplus (15). The parameter

 indicates the bargaining power of the worker, and 1- is the firm's weight. The firm knows

the skill level of the worker or can use the educational and experience background as proxy,

thus always using the right marginal contribution of the very worker when bargaining.

The bargaining solutions take the following form:

wti = 

yt nit-1

+

1 - i

i qti

+ (1 - ) bi - 1 - i - pit tEtti+1

(23)

where the future surplus of workers being employed is still included and can be further

simplified. Nonetheless, these intermediate wage equations can already help to refine the

firm's Euler equations. Differentiating equation (23) and substituting it into the firm's Euler

equation for labor demand help express the marginal product of labor more explicitly:

i tqti-1

+

wti

-

1 - i

i qti

=

yt nti-1

.

(24)

The left-hand side of equation (24) is the cost of the firm to employ an extra worker. Com-

pared to a perfectly competitive labor market where wage as the only labor cost equals the

13

marginal product of labor in an imperfect labor market the firm also takes into consideration the posting costs incurred and future posting costs saved.
As more skilled labor is hired its marginal product declines due to the law of diminishing marginal returns, while the marginal product of unskilled worker increases, since skilled and unskilled labor enter the CES production function in a complementary manner. As shown in equation (23), wages contain a fraction of the corresponding marginal products of labor. Therefore the skilled wage decreases and unskilled wage increases with an extra unit of skilled labor.
In order to find the final form of the solution, we still need to combine the optimality condition and the bargaining result for wage. Plugging the semi-final wage equation (24) back into the bargaining result and combining it with equation (15) we can solve for the value of employment,

ti

=

 1-

i .
tqti-1

Take (25) one period ahead, and recall that in the labor market pti = tiqti holds,

(25)

Etit+1

=

 i 1 -  tqti

=

1

 -



iti tpti

.

(26)

Using this result with equation (23), we can attain the final wage curves for skilled and

unskilled labor:

wti = 

yt nti-1

+

i

pti qti

+ (1 - ) bi.

(27)

These two wage curves enter the model equilibrium, which is defined as sequences of

prices and labor market tightness which solve the firm's, the household's and the bargaining

problems and clear the capital and labor markets. Other equilibrium equations include

households' Euler equations (equations (12), (13) and (14)), human capital evolution ((8) and

(11)), labor transition equations ((9) and (10)), time constraint ((4) and (5)), labor market

transitions ((1)-(3)), firms' Euler equations ((20) and (21)), production function (16), capital

evolution (17) and technology evolution (19), as well as the aggregate budget constraint:

yt = ct + kt - (1 -  ) kt-1 + xt + svts + uvtu.

(28)

14

The equilibrium is a system of 24 equations in 24 unknowns (t; xt; nst ; nut ; lts; ltu; uts; utu; vts; vtu; ts; tu; qts; qtu; pts; ptu; wts; wtu; yt; ct; kt; it; zt; t). With the help of Dynare, this non-linear system can be simulated around given steady state values, which will be the task
of the next section.

3 Calibration

I choose the model period to be one quarter, and as a robustness test I also use monthly

data to calibrate and then aggregate the results to a quarterly frequency. The results are

not exactly the same due to the specific persistence of technology shocks at different time

frequencies and minor changes in steady state values. In order to keep the results comparable

to available data and avoid the possible imprecision from time aggregation, the simulation

results at quarterly frequency are reported.

The parameters related to the aggregate economy are set to match post-war quarterly

U.S. data, except some alterations due to the model structure. Exploiting the steady state

equation of (20), the discount factor  is chosen to match an annual risk free rate of 4 percent.

Francis and Ramey (2005) report that the investment share of income in the post-war data,

i y

,

is

0.25.

To match this and a labor share of 70 percent3, the quarterly physical capital

depreciation rate is about 4 percent (15 percent annually).

According to the 2004 Current Population Survey (CPS), the labor hours performed by

workers with 12 years of education or less had fallen to less than 45 percent. I correspondingly

use it as the steady state value of . The weight of non-participation or leisure is set as 0.6

for all workers, as main time use data shows that on average people spend more than 60

percent of their time for leisure and home production, and this ratio even increased in the

last decades (Aguiar and Hurst, 2007). The technology parameter in production function 

is set as 0.5 for neutrality4.

The parameterization of labor market variables follows Ebell (2008), even though her

3In this numerical exercise, the choice of the labor share, which is higher than what's often used in RBC literature (see Kydland and Prescott, 1982, who estimated the capital share to be around 0.36, and labor share is 0.64), is to mitigate the human capital depreciation problem in the human capital formation equation.
4This renders skilled-unskilled wage ratio to be 1.2. This number is relatively small compared to Card and DiNardo's (2002) estimate using average hourly earnings data from the March CPS.

15

model is calibrated to a weekly frequency. As Shimer (2005) has estimated an average monthly

separation rate as 0.026, I choose 0.07 and 0.09 for skilled and unskilled workers respectively,

which leads to the monthly s and u to be 0.024 and 0.031 separately. Targeting a skilled

unemployment rate of 0.07 and unskilled unemployment rate of 0.1, I set the job finding rates

(ps and pu) as 0.875 and 0.833 for skilled and unskilled respectively. Again, their monthly

value, 0.5 and 0.45, are based on Shimer's estimation from monthly data, 0.45. The job-

filling rate qs and qu are set to 0.976 (or 0.71 monthly), which are in line with Den Haan,

Ramey and Watson's (2000) finding. Consequently, tightness for the skilled and unskilled

labor markets (s and u) are 0.897 and 0.855 respectively. The scaling parameters of the matching functions ms and mu can also be pinned down as 0.92 and 0.9 each.

The next pair of parameters to fix are the vacancy posting costs, s and u. Combining the wage curves and firms' Euler equations, a relationship between the i, workers' bargaining

power , and the value of non-market activity bi can be found. As Hagedorn and Manovskii's

(2008) calibration strategy aims at and succeeds in generating large fluctuations of vacancies

and market tightness, there is hardly any empirical evidence to support the extremely high

value of non-market activity, or the little bargaining power of workers. Furthermore, Cheron

(2005) has shown that, if hiring costs are merely borne to the firms and workers' quasi-

rents are protected by contract so that the hold-up problem is avoided, the Hosios condition

delivers efficiency when workers' bargaining power equals elasticity of the matching function.

A conventional choice is to set both  and

as 0.5 (Blanchard and Diamond, 1989).

bi wi

,

the

ratio of non-market activity to wage, is chosen to be 0.6, as a compromise of the extremely

high values in Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008) and the small value in Shimer (2005). I show

later that the variation of these ratios does not appear to change the final result to a large

extent. The s take the values 0.28 and 0.23.

The key parameters left to be decided are the two in the human capital transition equation:

The human capital depreciation rate  and the coefficient µ in new human capital formation

through on-the-job-training (learning by doing). The two equations concerned are (12), the

Euler equation in optimal human capital investment, and (8), the human capital formation

equation. The elasticity of human capital formation, , revealing how fast human capital is

accumulated during work, can lie between 0 and 1, so that F nts-1 is an upward-sloping concave curve with a relatively small slope. The choice of  within this range is not so strict,

16

unless one targets at a reasonable value of . The proper target of  is often under discussion. In reality, human capital can depreciate due to either voluntary reasons (mostly family-
related) or involuntary (unemployment, sick leave) career interruptions. The depreciation in the former case, mostly occurs to workers still on the jobs and is rather difficult to observe due to wage rigidity and the lack of proper measurement of productivity. As a result, the wage depreciation rate after unemployment is estimated as a proxy for human capital depreciation rate. For example, Keane and Wolpin (1997) use NLSY data and (structurally) estimate an annual wage depreciation rate for white U.S. males during unemployment of between 9.6 percent (for blue collars) and 36.5 percent (for white collars). Jacobson, LaLonde and Sullivan (1993) use plant closing data and find wage depreciation rates between 10 percent and 25 percent. However, wage is more rigid than human capital, in the sense that due to contract issues the wage does not correspondingly decrease as an immediate response to human capital declining. Consequently, the aforementioned estimation results turn to underestimate the human capital depreciation. By setting  = 0.1,  takes the value of 0.065, corresponding to an annual depreciation rate (0.23). This is still within the range mentioned above. This depreciation rate is almost the same as that of physical capital, making both types of capital stock more comparable.
The elasticities of leisure in households' utility function are key for the participation volatility. The assumption of flexible labor force is introduced into the RBC version of the MP model in Tripier (2004) and Veracierto (2008). Their model specifications fail to reproduce, most importantly, the countercyclical unemployment rate observed in U.S. data. Moreover, the resulting unemployment-vacancy correlation is strongly positive (Tripier, 2004) and unemployment fluctuates as much as output (Veracierto, 2008). One of the possible reasons for the poor performance of the models is how they parameterize the participation elasticity. Both papers choose the parameter value to reproduce the observed standard deviation of employment, implying relatively high elasticity (Tripier's choice implies a value of about 3). Comparatively, Ebell (2008) novelly uses the relative volatility of the participation rate to pin down this elasticity. Since the data shows low relative volatility of the participation, the elasticity pinned down is small, which, consequently, discourages worker's entering search from non-participation in response to a positive technology shock. Therefore, s and u in the current model are assumed to be identical and are set following Ebell (2008), aiming at
17

forming a very inelastic labor supply and thus market entering of the inactive workers.

The resulting labor supply elasticities are smaller than unity, which is consistent with

many microeconomic studies. I choose the elasticity parameter value as 0.05, yielding the

relative

volatilities

of

participation

as

ps y

=

0.07

and

pu y

= 0.08.

The model's recursive

law of motions further reveal that a 1 percent increase in total factor productivity leads to

a 5 percent increase in skill labor participation, and a slightly less than 4.7 percent increase

of unskilled labor participation. Exploiting the steady state Euler equations of households

concerning labor participation, I obtain the values of the utility parameters representing the

weights of leisure.

The model structure in the current paper deviates from that in Krebs (2003a), but the

concept of human capital being substitute of physical capital investment stays the same.

However, due to the natural constraint that human capital lies within range of (0, 1), its

absolute level is much smaller than that of capital stock. Therefore I cannot directly use

Krebs'(2003a) method to pin down the parameters of labor income risks5. Instead, I borrow

the result from microeconometric studies on labor income (Meghir and Pistaferri, 2004 and

Krishna and Senses, 2009), and set the estimated variance of the permanent income shock to

0.008 (annualized to 0.031). The standard deviation of the idiosyncratic shock is thus 0.089,

which seems to be extremely high for the current model and does not fit the model structure.

Instead, I calibrate the  to be half of the standard deviation of the productivity shock.

Concerning the persistence of the human capital shock ( in equation (11)), Krebs

(2003a) chooses this coefficient to be one and allows human capital shocks amount to perma-

nent labor income shocks, whereas the latter is often empirically found highly autoregressive

(and perhaps having even a unit root). The result of this specification is that the individ-

ual labor income process in equilibrium follows (approximately) a logarithmic random walk,

which would lead to over-estimated cross-sectional dispersion and variance of labor income.

Meanwhile, a recent study by Huggett and Kaplan (2010) using data on male annual labor

5See Krebs (2003a), equation (12). There the optimal choice is expressed as 1 -  = (rh - rk) /2, whereas



=

k k+h

.

After

simple

alteration,

it

becomes

the

following

equation:

2

=

(k

+ h) (rh h

- rk) .

18

earnings from the PSID finds the persistence of the permanent component of labor income risk to be 0.934 (0.835 for high school equivalents and 0.915 for college equivalents separately). The magnitude of these estimates, according to the authors, could be overstated because much of the large rise in the log-earning variance observed over the working lifetime can actually be accounted for by learning ability differences across individuals (Huggett, Ventura and Yaron, 2006).
I thus calibrate , the persistence of the human capital shock at a high (0.95) and a low value (0.85) and study the effect of the human capital shock persistence. For the technology shock, I follow what's widely used in the RBC literature (e.g. Hansen, 1985), to set the coefficient  = 0.95, and the standard deviation of the residual as 0.01.
Finally, what's also important for the heterogeneous skills story, the choice of elasticity of substitution comes into sight. As summarized by Acemoglu (2002), the majority of micro studies estimate this elasticity, through the behavior of skill premium, to be between 1 and 2. Autor, Katz and Krueger (1998) argue that a consensus estimate is a value around 1.5, when the two skill groups are college and high school workers (e.g. 1.4 by Katz and Murphy, 1992 for the 1963-87 period using March CPS). Consequently I set  = 1.4 in the benchmark model, and further examine the effect of a high elasticity of 2, the value implied in Angrist (1995). All simulation results will be compared with the second moments of U.S. data summarized by Shimer (2005) in Table 1.
4 Simulation and Impulse Response Analysis
4.1 Simulated Results of the Benchmark Model ( = 1.4,  = 0.85)
Due to the participation margin and low participation elasticity, the model can generate negative Beverage curves in both skilled and unskilled markets. The reasoning is well-argued in Ebell (2008). Under a positive productivity shock, workers respond latently in participating in the labor force (exiting non-participation) and start searching. The impact on unemployment is small compared to that on vacancy creation, thus tightness and job-finding rates increase strongly. The strong increase of job-finding rates speeds up workers' leaving unemployment and thus unemployment decreases soon after the shock. As shown in Table 2, skilled and unskilled unemployment has a positive correlation of 0.314, as a result of unbiased
19

technology shocks and biased human capital shocks. The correlations between unemployment and vacancies are negative in both markets (-0.22 and -0.46 for skilled and unskilled respectively), while the cross-correlations are even higher (vs,uu = -0.87, vu,us = -0.83). In total, the correlation between total unemployment and vacancy is -0.83, which is quite a good match compared to Shimer's (2005) data summary (-0.894).
Another quantitative benchmark usually discussed in related literature is the correlation between unemployment and output. As the data shows this correlation to be -0.88, the model generates even higher (more negative) correlation, -0.95. The skill-specific unemployment rates are less correlated with output (-0.72 and -0.81 respectively). As Hagedorn and Manovskii (2010) recently find, exploiting the Current Population Survey (CPS), the total labor productivity, defined as output over total labor, is strongly correlated with employment (correlation: p,n = 0.719), unemployment (p,u = -0.633), vacancies (p,v = 0.719), and market tightness (p, = 0.703). My model generates much higher values (subsequent correlations: 0.99, -0.94, 0.96, 0.99), which is common in related literature, and as Hagedorn and Manovskii (2010) point out, this discrepancy can be alleviated by adding two new model features, namely "time to build" (lags in vacancy posting) and a stochastic value of home production. Finally, training investment (xt) responds positively to the technology shock, but negatively to the human capital shock. In total, the negative response dominates and xt negatively correlates with output, even though the correlation is small (-0.03). This result matches well with several empirical findings on the cyclicality of training (Sepulveda, 2004, Bassanini and Brunello, 2007).
The model can generate volatile standard deviations of labor market variables. Relative to the standard deviation of the productivity shock, the standard deviation of the total market tightness is 10.87 times higher. Total unemployment is 5 times and total vacancy is 6.32 times more volatile than productivity. Specifically, relative standard deviation of the skilled unemployment (6.45) is slightly higher than the unskilled (5.98), while that of the skilled vacancy creation (7.48) is higher than its unskilled counterpart (6.8). The standard deviation of human capital investment is very large compared to output (33 times), which is in line with Sepulveda's (2004) finding, that training is highly volatile over the cycle.
20

4.2 Impulse Responses
4.2.1 The Effect of a Technology Shock ( t)
Both skilled and unskilled unemployment reacts first positively to the technology shock, and decreases strongly after two periods (Figure 2). The immediate positive responses of both types of vacancies contribute to their high procyclicality. The response of skilled vacancies slightly exceeds that of unskilled labor, which corresponds to the difference of their coefficients in the policy functions (skilled vacancies react 7 percent more strongly than unskilled vacancies). Consequently, the skilled tightness also exceeds the unskilled tightness by 4.5 percent in the policy function and compared to u, s is slightly higher correlated with y. Small as these differences are, they indicate that the neutral technology shock is in fact skill-biased, in the sense that the skilled labor market situation improves more due to the technology shock. The underlying quantitative reason is the smaller share (less than 50 percent) of skilled workers in the total labor force. Skilled labor productivity (average and marginal) are accordingly higher than their unskilled counterpart. A positive technology shock, therefore, benefits skilled labor more than unskilled. In contrast, a negative shock induces a larger proportional loss for a marginal skilled worker than for a marginal unskilled worker, resulting in a declining skill premium. The firms would naturally prefer an additional skilled worker to an unskilled worker under such circumstances, and therefore the unskilled workers suffer even more from losing the market power and being replaced in recessions.
Figure 3 shows that aggregate labor market variables behave similarly to Ebell (2008). Due to small participation elasticity, the uptick in unemployment is more modest than vacancies so that tightness increases strongly. The sharp drop of unemployment after the initial moment insures its countercyclicality and the negative correlation between unemployment and vacancies.
4.2.2 The Effect of a Human Capital Shock (et)
The inclusion of human capital formation and transition allows for examining the crucial contribution of active labor market policy to decreasing aggregate unemployment upon a positive technology shock. The effect of a human capital shock is in both short-run and longrun. As a prompt reaction to a positive shock, there is a surge of supply of skilled workers.
21

Unable to find jobs immediately, these workers flow into skilled unemployment , whereas their shift away from unskilled labor market mitigates unskilled unemployment. Therefore we observe a positive immediate response of skilled unemployment and a negative reaction of the unskilled unemployment.
Skilled vacancies also react positively to the shock, and the amplitude is smaller than that of skilled unemployment. Comparatively, as unskilled vacancies react negatively to the shock just like unskilled unemployment, the percentage deviation of vacancies is smaller than that of unemployment. On the one hand, market tightness and job finding rates decrease in the skilled labor market and increase in the unskilled market. The vacancy filling rate, on the opposite, responds positively in the skilled market and negatively in the unskilled market. Since it becomes relatively easier to recruit skilled workers, and more difficult to hire unskilled, firms post fewer skilled vacancies and more unskilled vacancies. This explains the change in direction of the impulse response of vacancies. On the other hand, the wage difference between the skilled and unskilled declines, meaning that skilled workers become relatively cheaper. The natural reaction of the firms is to adjust their labor input share to the change in the labor market structure, using more productive workers to replace less productive ones. In equilibrium, skilled workers' participation increases more than that of the unskilled workers, because of the larger margin between participation and non-participation.
Figures 4 and 5 report the effect of a positive human capital shock, which contemporaneously increases the skilled and decreases the unskilled labor force. As an example, one can consider one effective training course in the scheme of active labor market policy, through which a small share of unskilled workers are upgraded into the skilled labor force. As the skilled labor participation extends, the newly-trained skilled workers cannot find jobs instantly but enter skilled unemployment directly, thus at once the skilled unemployment responds positively. The reaction of skilled vacancy posting is also very prompt, even though its percentage deviation is slightly lower than that of skilled unemployment. Thus the skilled labor market tightness reacts negatively to the shock. Declining market tightness pushes the firm into a better position, since for every posted vacancy there are more applicants. This instant over-supply and under-price of skilled labor induce firms to use skilled labor to substitute the unskilled, so that the deviation of the skilled unemployment soon returns to the steady state and becomes negative.
22

There is a small drop of unskilled participation due to those up-skilled workers. Meanwhile, unemployment of the unskilled workers decreases first due to the sudden contraction of labor force, which is accompanied by a smaller reduction of unskilled vacancies. Unskilled labor market tightness increases accordingly, and afterwards returns slowly to the steady state. As vacancies per searching worker increase, unskilled wage also rises, and the relative price of unskilled worker becomes higher. As discussed above, unskilled workers are partly replaced by the skilled, and unskilled unemployment converges quickly toward the initial level.
In aggregate, total unemployment reacts at first negatively to the human capital shock (Figure 6). This is mainly due to the reduction of unskilled unemployment. The response returns to the steady state quickly, but experiences a second negative impulse. This second unemployment reduction is mostly fuelled by the decreasing skilled unemployment because of the skill substitution. Total vacancies also observe a two-stage response toward the shock, which sink firstly due to the dominant deduction of the unskilled vacancies, and recover shortly afterward because of the strong skilled vacancy creation and unskilled vacancy recovery. The response of aggregate market tightness, which is positive and shows a smooth hump, can also explain the second-stage decline of total unemployment, since on average workers can find jobs more easily.
An increase in  increases the persistence of human capital shock, and therefore multiplies the shock effect on the variables. Relative standard deviations of the skilled and unskilled variables all increase, while, at an aggregate level, unemployment, employment, vacancy and market tightness increase too, only to a smaller extent. Because the initial response of total employment is more negative and that of capital stock does not increase sufficient, total output decreases in the first two periods, and the response becomes positive from the third quarter on.
Skill-specific vacancies and unemployment increase by the same amount, so that correlation within- and across markets declines. The aggregate u - v correlation, nonetheless, does not vary much.
4.3 The Importance of the Elasticity of Substitution
The elasticity of substitution indicates how well the two labor factors can substitute each other. For a given change in relative prices, a higher  implies a larger change in the labor
23

inputs. The statistics of the simulation results are summarized in Table 3. The relative standard deviations increase for all variables. The aggregate correlation
becomes more negative to -0.85. As the u - v correlation across the markets rise to vs,uu = -0.90 and vu,us = -0.85, the within-market correlation decreases. vu,uu declines to -0.29, and vs,us even becomes positive (0.09).
Skilled participation, on the opposite, becomes more procyclical, implying more workers entering the labor market searching for skilled jobs. The uptick of unemployment becomes larger and on average the quarterly countercyclicality of unemployment is now weaker (us,y = -0.60 v.s. -0.72 in the benchmark case). Meanwhile, as skilled vacancies becomes less procyclical (vs,y = 0.74) than before (0.83), the correlation between skilled unemployment and vacancies becomes positive.
On the unskilled market, even though the cyclicality of both unemployment and vacancies become weaker than the benchmark, the changes are to a similar degree (Figure 7). The impulse response of unskilled participation shows that the initial positive reaction is lower, and the reversed further reaction is larger than the baseline. As a result, on average fewer inactive unskilled workers' enter search and unskilled participation becomes countercyclical. In aggregate, the variables react more intensively to the shock (Figure 8).
Given a high , the substitution between two types of labor becomes larger upon a change of the relative factor price than the baseline. Key labor market variables react more strongly to human capital shocks. In the impulse response graphic of the total unemployment to a positive human capital shock, even though the first-stage downtick is similar, the secondstage downtick is much more prominent than the baseline, which contributes to the higher correlation (in absolute value) between total unemployment and output (Figure 9). On the opposite, aggregate vacancies react to a smaller extent to the same shock than the baseline. As aggregate unemployment becomes much more countercyclical, and total vacancies experience smaller changes, the u - v correlation becomes higher in absolute value and thus closer to the data.
24

5 Policy Implication
The simulation experiments have shown that the weak position of unskilled workers varies over the business cycle. Skill substitution is persistent and especially strong during recessions, leading to high unskilled unemployment both in level and volatility. The previous section has shown that skill-specific labor markets become more volatile and the vulnerability of the unskilled workers rises with the differentiation between the skilled and unskilled (an increase in ), as well as with the persistence of the human capital shock.
Associated with such observations, what can be done to alleviate the inferior situation of the unskilled workers? Let's return to the active labor market policy discussions at the beginning of this paper. As found in Card, Kluve and Weber (2010), classroom and on-thejob training programs appear to be particularly likely to yield more favorable medium-term than short-term impact estimates. This coincides with the observation above, that aggregate unemployment experiences a two-stage decline: Firstly with a reduction in unskilled unemployment due to the skill upgrade of marginal workers through active training, and then with a sharp decline of skilled unemployment when skill substitution dominates. Training programs provide skill upgrade opportunities to the lower-skilled workers, and consequently preserve the average skill level of the total labor force. The positive effects implied are not only on the skill-specific, but also on the aggregate labor market variables. Therefore, the challenging tasks in the real world include at least two points: How to set the correct incentive schemes so as to encourage workers, and especially unemployed workers, to participate training, and how to identify an effective combination of active labor market policies that help achieve the short-run and longer-run goals simultaneously.
6 Conclusion
This paper studies the rationale of skill-specific labor market variables in a framework where labor force structure is endogenized and the flow between skill types is allowed through training decisions. Skilled and unskilled workers are not only connected due to their substitutability in production, but also through the skill-training system. As labor, also interpreted as human capital here, can experience skill-downgrade due to human capital depreciation, it
25

can also be accumulated and upgraded through sufficient training, be it on the job or general training.
By modeling the transmission between skilled and unskilled labor force, this framework allows the study of the effect of human capital shock on the dynamics in skilled and unskilled markets. This trait is important not only due to its direct relevance to the highly debated active labor market policy, but also because of the decomposition of aggregate unemployment into skill specific and term specific. As a consequence, idiosyncratic shocks in human capital formation, in conjunction with the technology shocks, produce high volatility and downwardsloping the Beveridge curves in skill-specific labor markets. Inelastic labor participation also contributes to these results. Moreover, in aggregate, unemployment and vacancies display data-resembling high negative correlation.
In the current setup allowing for skill substitution and transition between two types of labor, the negative slope of the Beveridge curve is a result of two-staged effects on unemployment on vacancies. Particularly, upon the human capital shock, total unemployment reacts negatively due to the reduction of unskilled unemployment; a second unemployment reduction results from the overwhelmingly decreasing skilled unemployment, since skilled labor substitutes out the unskilled. Active labor market policy can therefore reinforce the unemployment reduction caused by technology shocks, especially at higher elasticity of substitution between the two types of labor. Total vacancies also observe a two-stage response toward the shock, which sink firstly due to the dominant deduction of the unskilled vacancies, and recover shortly afterward because of the strong skilled vacancy creation and unskilled vacancy recovery.
This model setup can be used to explore the skill-specific market dynamics and crossconnections between the key variables. What's worth studying further includes the exact form of the human capital accumulation. A more specified setup can help evaluate the effects of specific training program on unemployment and other labor market indicators.
References
[1] Acemoglu D. (2002), "Technical Change, Inequality, and the Labor Market," Journal of Economic Literature 40(1), 7-72, American Economic Association.
26

[2] Acemoglu, D. and J.S. Pischke (1999), "Beyond Becker: Training in Imperfect Labour Markets," The Economic Journal 109(453), F112-42.
[3] Aguiar M. and E. Hurst (2007), "Measuring trends in leisure: the allocation of time over five decades," The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(3), 969-1006.
[4] Andolfatto, D. (1996), "Business Cycles and Labor-Market Search," American Economic Review 861, 112-32, American Economic Association.
[5] Angrist, J.D. (1995), "The Economic Returns to Schooling in the West Bank and Gaza Strip," American Economic Review 85(5), 1065-87.
[6] Autor D.H., L.F. Katz and A.B. Krueger (1998), "Computing Inequality: Have Computers Changed The Labor Market?," The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(4), 1169-213.
[7] Bassanini A. and G. Brunello (2007), "Barriers to Entry, Deregulation and Workplace Training," IZA Discussion Papers 2746.
[8] Blanchard O.J. and P. Diamond (1989), "The Beveridge Curve," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 20(1989-1), 1-76.
[9] Boone, J. and J.C. van Ours (2004), "Effective Active Labor Market Policies," IZA Discussion Papers 1335.
[10] Burda, M.C. and M. Weder (2010), "Payroll Taxes, Social Insurance and Business Cycles," Discussion Papers 5150.
[11] Burdett, K., C. Carrillo-Tudela and M. Coles (2009), "Human Capital Accumulation and Labour Market Equilibrium," IZA Discussion Papers 4215.
[12] Calvo, G.A. (1983), "Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework," Journal of Monetary Economics 12(3), 38398.
[13] Card, D. and J.E. DiNardo (2002), "Skill-Biased Technological Change and Rising Wage Inequality: Some Problems and Puzzles," Journal of Labor Economics 20(4), 733-83.
[14] Card, D., J. Kluve and A. Weber (2010), "Active Labor Market Policy Evaluations: A Meta-Analysis," The Economic Journal 120(548), F452-77.
27

[15] Cheron, A. (2005), "Efficient v.s. equilibrium unemployment with match-specific costs," Economics Letters 88(2), 176-183.
[16] Costain, J.S. and M. Reiter (2008), "Business Cycles, Unemployment Insurance, and the Calibration of Matching Models," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 32, 112055.
[17] DeJong, D.N. and B.F. Ingram (2001), "The Cyclical Behavior of Skill Acquisition," Review of Economic Dynamics 4(3), 536-561.
[18] Den Haan, W., G. Ramey, J. Watson (2000), "Job Destruction and the Propagation of Shocks," American Economic Review 90(3), 482-98.
[19] Ebell, M., 2008 "Resurrecting the Participation Margin," CEP Discussion Paper 0873, Centre for Economic Performance.
[20] Francis, N. and V.A. Ramey (2002), "Is the Technology-Driven Real Business Cycle Hypothesis Dead?," NBER Working Papers 8726.
[21] Gertler, M. and A. Trigari, "Unemployment Fluctuations with Staggered Nash Wage Bargaining," Journal of Political Economy 117(1), 3886.
[22] Hagedorn, M. and I. Manovskii (2008), "The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies Revisited," American Economic Review 98(4), 1692-1706.
[23] Hagedorn, M. and I. Manovskii (2010), "Productivity and the Labor Market: CoMovement over the Business Cycle," International Economic Review Forthcoming.
[24] Hagedorn, M., I. Manovskii and S. Stetsenko (2008), "The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies With Worker Heterogeneity," Unpublished Paper, University of Pennsylvania.
[25] Hall, R. (2005a), "Employment Fluctuations With Equilibrium Wage Stickiness," American Economic Review 95, 5065.
[26] Hall, R. (2005b), "Job Loss, Job Finding, and Unemployment in the U.S. Economy over the past Fifty" NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 101-137.
28

[27] Hall, R. and P.R. Milgrom (2008), "The Limited Influence of Unemployment on the Wage Bargain," American Economic Review 98(4), 165374.
[28] Hansen, G. (1985) "Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle," Journal of Monetary Economics 16, 309-327.
[29] Heckman, J.J., E.J. LaLonde and J.A. Smith (1999), "The Economics and Econometrics of Active Labour Market Programs," in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, editors, Handbook of Labor Economics 3, 18652097, Elsevier.
[30] Heaton, J. and D.J. Lucas (1996), "Evaluating the Effects of Incomplete Markets on Risk Sharing and Asset Pricing," Journal of Political Economy 104(3), 443-87.
[31] Huggett, M. and G. Kaplan (2010), "Human capital values and returns: bounds implied by earnings and asset returns data," Staff Report 448, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
[32] Huggett, M., G. Ventura and A. Yaron (2006), "Human capital and earnings distribution dynamics," Journal of Monetary Economics 53(2), 265-90.
[33] Jacobson, L.S., R.J. LaLonde and D.G. Sullivan (1993), "Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers," American Economic Review 83(4), 685-709.
[34] Katz, L.F. and K.M. Murphy (1992), "Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and Demand Factors," The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(1), 35-78.
[35] Keane, M.P. and K.I. Wolpin (1997), "The Career Decisions of Young Men," Journal of Political Economy 105(3), 473-522.
[36] Kluve, J. (2007), "The Effectiveness of European ALMP's," in Jochen Kluve et al., Active Labor Market Policies in Europe: Performance and Perspectives, 153-203. Berlin and Heidelberg: Springer.
[37] Krebs, T. (2003a), "Human Capital Risk And Economic Growth," The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(2), 709-44.
[38] Krebs, T. (2003b), "Growth and Welfare Effects of Business Cycles in Economies with Idiosyncratic Human Capital Risk," Review of Economic Dynamics 6(4), 846-68.
29

[39] Krishna P. and M. Z. Senses (2009), "International Trade and Labor Income Risk in the United States," NBER Working Papers 14992, National Bureau of Economic Research.
[40] Krusell, P. and A.A. Smith Jr. (1999), "On the welfare effects of eliminating business cycles," Review of Economic Dynamics 2(1), 245-72.
[41] Krusell, P., T. Mukoyama, A. Sahin and A.A. Smith, Jr. (2009), "Revisiting the Welfare Effects of Eliminating Business Cycles," Review of Economic Dynamics 12(3), 393-402.
[42] Kydland, F.E. and E.C. Prescott (1982), "Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations," Econometrica 50(6), 1345-70.
[43] Levine, D.K. and W.R. Zame (2002), "Does Market Incompleteness Matter?," Econometrica 70(5), 1805-39.
[44] Loewenstein, M.A. and J.R. Spletzer (1999), "General and Specific Training: Evidence and Implications," Journal of Human Resources 34(4), 710-33.
[45] Ljungqvist, L. and T.J. Sargent (2007a), "Understanding European unemployment with a representative family model," Journal of Monetary Economics 54(8), 2180-204.
[46] Ljungqvist, L. and T.J. Sargent (2007b), "Understanding European unemployment with matching and search-island models," Journal of Monetary Economics 54(8), 2139-79.
[47] Ljungqvist, L. and T.J. Sargent (2008), "Two Questions about European Unemployment," Econometrica 76(1), 1-29.
[48] Mark Huggett and Greg Kaplan (2010), "Human Capital Values and Returns:Bounds Implied By Earnings and Asset Returns Data," Working Papers, 10-10-02, Georgetown University, Department of Economics.
[49] Meghir, C. and L. Pistaferri (2004), "Income Variance Dynamics and Heterogeneity," Econometrica 72(1), 1-32.
[50] Merz, M. (1995), "Search in the Labor Market and the Real Business Cycle," Journal of Monetary Economics 36(2), 269300.
30

[51] Mortensen, D.T. and E. Nagyp¥al (2007), "More on Unemployment and Vacancy Fluctuations," Review of Economic Dynamics 10(3), 32747.
[52] Mortensen, D.T. and C.A. Pissarides (1994), "Job Creation and Job Destruction in the Theory of Unemployment," The Review of Economic Studies 61(3), 397415.
[53] Mukoyama, T. and A. Sahin (2006), "Costs of business cycles for unskilled workers," Journal of Monetary Economics 53(8), 2179-93.
[54] Nickell, S. and B. Bell (1996), "Changes in the Distribution of Wages and Unemployment in OECD Countries," American Economic Review 86(2), 302-08.
[55] Perli, R. and P. Sakellaris (1996), "Human Capital and Business Cycle Persistence," mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.
[56] Pischke J.S. (2001), "Continuous training in Germany," Journal of Population Economics 14(3), 523-48.
[57] Pissarides, C.A. (2009), "The Unemployment Volatility Puzzle: Is Wage Stickiness the Answer?," Econometrica 77(5), 1339-69.
[58] Sepulveda, F. (2004), "Training and Business Cycles," Working Paper, Australian National University, available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=830404.
[59] Shimer, R. (2005), "The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies," American Economic Review 95(1), 25-49.
[60] Tripier, F. (2004), "Can the Labor Market Search Model Explain the Fluctuations of Allocations of Time?," Economic Modelling 21(1), 131-46.
[61] Veracierto, M. (2008), "On the Cyclical Behavior of Employment, Unemployment and Labor Force Participation," Journal of Monetary Economics 55(6), 1143-57.
[62] Xie, R. (2008), "Skill-Specific Unemployment with Imperfect Substitution of Skills," SFB 649 Discussion Paper 2008-024, Humboldt University of Berlin.
31

Table 1: Shimer's Summary Statistics, Quarterly U.S. Data, 1951-2003

Variable 

u v v/u

Standard Deviation

Relative

std.

deviation

 z

Autocorrelation

0.190 9.5 0.936

0.202 10.1 0.940

0.382 19.1 0.941

z 0.020
1.0 0.878

Correlation

u 1 -0.894 -0.971 -0.408

v-

1 0.975 0.364

v/u -

-

1 0.396

z-

-

-

1

Source:

Shimer (2005, Table 1);

Relative standard deviation

 z

is own

calculation.

Table 2: Baseline Results: Cyclicality of Labor Market Variables in Skill and Unskilled

( = 1.4,  = 0.85)

Variable 

Relative

std.

deviation

 z

Autocorrelation

us 6.45 0.539

uu 5.98 0.708

vs 7.48 0.617

vu 6.80 0.722

vs/us 10.90 0.975

vu/uu 10.92 0.977

u 5.03 0.948

v 6.32 0.865

v/u 10.87 0.977

y 4.85 0.979

Corr.

us uu vs vu vs/us vu/uu u v v/u z

1 0.314 -0.219 -0.832 -0.743 -0.690 0.764 -0.625 -0.717 -0.723

- 1 -0.867 -0.458 -0.781 -0.833 0.852 -0.72 -0.813 -0.81

--

1 0.586 0.816 0.839 -0.71 0.866 0.832 0.828

--

-

1 0.895 0.873 -0.77 0.913 0.887 0.886

--

-

-

1 0.985 -0.94 0.964 0.995 0.997

--

-

-

-

1 -0.946 0.963 0.997 0.995

--

-

-

-

-

1 -0.833 -0.947 -0.948

--

-

-

-

-

-

1 0.967 0.965

--

-

-

-

-

-

-

1 0.999

--

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

1

All variables reported are log deviations from an HP trend.

32

Table 3: Cyclicality under Higher Elasticity of Substitution ( = 2.0,  = 0.85)

Variable 

us uu

vs

vu vs/us vu/uu

u

v v/u

Relative

std.

deviation

 z

Autocorrelation

7.77 6.99 0.349 0.619

8.74 0.475

7.57 0.639

11.18 0.977

11.69 0.979

5.3 0.954

6.6 0.876

11.44 0.979

y 5.09 0.981

Corr.

us uu vs vu vs/us vu/uu u v v/u z

1 0.036 0.088 -0.847 -0.627 -0.57 0.633 -0.51 -0.587 -0.603

- 1 -0.900 -0.288 -0.729 -0.785 0.796 -0.697 -0.771 -0.759

--

1 0.333 0.721 0.753 -0.644 0.783 0.749 0.738

--

-

1 0.849 0.82 -0.736 0.847 0.83 0.836

--

-

-

1 0.986 -0.944 0.967 0.995 0.997

--

-

-

-

1 -0.953 0.965 0.998 0.995

--

-

-

-

-

1 -0.848 -0.952 -0.953

--

-

-

-

-

-

1 0.97 0.968

--

-

-

-

-

-

-

1 0.999

--

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

1

All variables reported are log deviations from an HP trend.

Figure 1: Structure of the Model 33

Figure 2: Impulse Responses to a Technology Shock, Skilled and Unskilled ( = 1.4) 34

Figure 3: Impulse Responses to a Technology Shock, Aggregate ( = 1.4) 35

Figure 4: Impulse Responses to a Human Capital Shock, Skilled ( = 1.4) 36

Figure 5: Impulse Responses to a Human Capital Shock, Unskilled ( = 1.4) 37

Figure 6: Impulse Responses to a Human Capital Shock, Aggregate ( = 1.4) 38

Figure 7: Impulse Responses to a Technology Shock, Skill and Unskilled ( = 2) 39

Figure 8: Impulse Responses to a Technology Shock, Aggregate ( = 2) 40

Figure 9: Impulse Responses to a Human Capital Shock, Aggregate ( = 2) 41

SFB 649 Discussion Paper Series 2011
For a complete list of Discussion Papers published by the SFB 649, please visit http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de.
001 "Localising temperature risk" by Wolfgang Karl H‰rdle, Brenda LÛpez Cabrera, Ostap Okhrin and Weining Wang, January 2011.
002 "A Confidence Corridor for Sparse Longitudinal Data Curves" by Shuzhuan Zheng, Lijian Yang and Wolfgang Karl H‰rdle, January 2011.
003 "Mean Volatility Regressions" by Lu Lin, Feng Li, Lixing Zhu and Wolfgang Karl H‰rdle, January 2011.
004 "A Confidence Corridor for Expectile Functions" by Esra Akdeniz Duran, Mengmeng Guo and Wolfgang Karl H‰rdle, January 2011.
005 "Local Quantile Regression" by Wolfgang Karl H‰rdle, Vladimir Spokoiny and Weining Wang, January 2011.
006 "Sticky Information and Determinacy" by Alexander Meyer-Gohde, January 2011.
007 "Mean-Variance Cointegration and the Expectations Hypothesis" by Till Strohsal and Enzo Weber, February 2011.
008 "Monetary Policy, Trend Inflation and Inflation Persistence" by Fang Yao, February 2011.
009 "Exclusion in the All-Pay Auction: An Experimental Investigation" by Dietmar Fehr and Julia Schmid, February 2011.
010 "Unwillingness to Pay for Privacy: A Field Experiment" by Alastair R. Beresford, Dorothea K¸bler and Sˆren Preibusch, February 2011.
011 " Human Capital Formation on Skill-Specific Labor Markets" by Runli Xie, February 2011.
SFB 649, Ziegelstraﬂe 13a, D-10117 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

