BERLIN

SFB 6 4 9 E C O N O M I C R I S K

SFB 649 Discussion Paper 2012-019
Why Do Firms Engage in Selective Hedging?
Tim R. Adam* Chitru S. Fernando**
Jesus M. Salas***
* Humboldt-Universit‰t zu Berlin, Germany ** University of Oklahoma, USA *** Lehigh University, USA
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".
http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de ISSN 1860-5664
SFB 649, Humboldt-Universit‰t zu Berlin Spandauer Straﬂe 1, D-10178 Berlin

Why Do Firms Engage in Selective Hedging?
Tim R. Adam School of Business and Economics, Humboldt University of Berlin
Dorotheenstr. 1, 10117 Berlin, Germany Tel.: (+49 30) 2093 5641; E-mail: tim.adam@wiwi.hu-berlin.de
Chitru S. Fernando Michael F. Price College of Business, University of Oklahoma
307 West Brooks St., Norman, OK 73019, USA Tel.: (405) 325-2906; E-mail: cfernando@ou.edu
Jesus M. Salas College of Business & Economics, Lehigh University
621 Taylor Street, Bethlehem, PA 18015, USA Tel: (610) 758-3440; E-mail: jsalas@lehigh.edu
January 2012
Abstract
Surveys of corporate risk management document that selective hedging, where managers incorporate their market views into firms' hedging programs, is widespread in the U.S. and other countries. Stulz (1996) argues that selective hedging could enhance the value of firms that possess an information advantage relative to the market and have the financial strength to withstand the additional risk from market timing. We study the practice of selective hedging in a 10-year sample of North American gold mining firms and find that selective hedging is most prevalent among firms that are least likely to meet these valuemaximizing criteria -- (a) smaller firms, i.e., firms that are least likely to have private information about future gold prices; and (b) firms that are closest to financial distress. The latter finding provides support for the alternative possibility suggested by Stulz that selective hedging may also be driven by asset substitution motives. We detect weak relationships between selective hedging and some corporate governance measures, especially board size, but find no evidence of a link between selective hedging and managerial compensation.
JEL Classification: G11; G14; G32; G39 Keywords: Corporate risk management, selective hedging, speculation, financial distress, corporate governance, managerial compensation.
 We thank Stephen Brown, Alex Butler, Sudheer Chava, Sean Cleary, Louis Ederington, Gary Emery, Vladimir Gatchev, Janya Golubeva, Dirk Jenter, Swami Kalpathy, Leonid Kogan, Olaf Korn, Zhi Li, Scott Linn, Steve Mann, Gustavo Manso, Bill Megginson, Darius Miller, Thomas Moeller, Jun Pan, Roberto Rigobon, Martin Ruckes, Antoinette Schoar, Venkat Subramaniam, Rex Thompson, Sheri Tice, Lingling Wang, Pradeep Yadav and seminar participants at MIT, University of Oklahoma, University of Texas at Dallas, Southern Methodist University, Tulane University, Texas Christian University, Humboldt University, ESMT Berlin, the European Finance Association Meetings, the FMA Annual Meetings, the FMA European Conference and the German Finance Association Meetings for their comments. We also thank Ted Reeve for providing us with his derivative surveys of gold mining firms, and Sridhar Gogineni and Leung Kam Ming for excellent research assistance. This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk", and this support is gratefully acknowledged. Fernando gratefully acknowledges financial support from the National Science Foundation (Grant No. ECS-0323620) and Salas gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Center for Financial Studies, Michael F. Price College of Business. We are responsible for any remaining errors.

I. Introduction Surveys of corporate hedging programs provide extensive evidence that firms routinely
speculate within the context of their hedging programs by varying the size and the timing of their derivatives transactions based on managers' market views, a practice known as "selective hedging." For example, Dolde (1993), Bodnar, Hayt and Marston (1998), and Glaum (2002) report that the majority of firms in their respective surveys at least sometimes base the size of their hedges on their views of future market movements. Faulkender (2005), Adam and Fernando (2006), Brown, Crabb and Haushalter (2006), Beber and Fabbri (2006), and GÈczy, Minton and Schrand (2007) also provide empirical evidence that is consistent with selective hedging.
Stulz (1996) proposes a modified theory of corporate risk management that sets out the two economic criteria that need to be satisfied for firms to create value for their shareholders by engaging in selective hedging. First, firms need to possess an information advantage relative to the market to add value through market timing. Second, firms need sufficient financial strength to take additional speculative risks based on this information advantage without jeopardizing their core business. To our knowledge, there has been no attempt in the literature to relate the practice of selective hedging to these criteria for value enhancement. Moreover, there has been no investigation of the alternative possibility suggested by Stulz (1996) that even in the absence of private information, financially distressed firms can be motivated by an asset substitution incentive to engage in selective hedging.
We examine these questions by studying the derivatives usage strategies of a sample of 92 North American gold mining firms between 1989 and 1999.1 The gold mining industry is an ideal laboratory for a study of selective hedging because reasonable measures of the extent of
1 The data was collected by Ted Reeve of Scotia Capital by means of a quarterly survey. Unfortunately, this survey was discontinued in 1999, which limits our study to the 10-year period starting 1989.
3

selective hedging can be calculated due to the high data quality,2 and selective hedging appears to be widespread in this industry.3 Additionally, it is plausible that at least some firms in this industry possess an information advantage with respect to the future gold supply and hence, the gold price.4 Firms with a larger business presence in a particular market are more likely to acquire valuable information about this market. Stulz (1996) cites the hypothetical example of a producer of consumer durables using copper as a major input. Such a firm would have a significant incentive to gather information about the demand and supply of copper. Similarly, a large gold producing company with operations across countries or even continents has an incentive and ability to acquire information about the determinants of future gold prices. Such information could certainly affect a firm's risk management strategy.
We measure selective hedging in our sample by the deviations of actual derivatives positions from predicted derivatives positions assuming a pure hedging rationale. We find that the extent of selective hedging is positively correlated with a firm's future stock return volatility, which suggests that selective hedging increases risk as surmised by Stulz (1996). We find a negative relation between selective hedging and firm size, implying that smaller firms speculate more than larger firms. This result stands in stark contrast to our findings for firms in the same sample (and by other researchers in several prior studies) that larger firms are more likely than smaller firms to use derivatives and hedge a higher fraction of their exposure. We find similar negative relations between selective hedging and two other measures of a firm's footprint in the gold market ≠ its annual gold production and its total gold reserves. In the gold mining industry, firm size, gold production, and gold reserves are all likely to be positively correlated with an
2 To our knowledge the gold mining industry is the only industry where the available data is sufficiently detailed to enable a systematic study of corporate speculation with derivatives. 3 See Adam and Fernando (2006), and Brown, Crabb and Haushalter (2006). 4 See, for example, Brown, Crabb and Haushalter (2006).
4

information advantage with respect to the aggregate gold production and hence the future gold price. Thus, it is those firms that should be least likely to have an information advantage that speculate the most.
In addition, we find a negative relation between selective hedging and the probability of financial distress, as measured by either Altman's (1968) Z-score or Ohlson's (1980) O-score. Firms with the highest probabilities of bankruptcy tend to speculate the most, which is consistent with Stulz (1996)'s prediction for uninformed firms. These results are the opposite of what one would expect if selective hedging were adding to firm value. Instead, they are consistent with the classical asset-substitution problem first articulated by Jensen and Meckling (1976) and applied to the context of selective hedging by Stulz (1996) and Campbell and Kracaw (1999) as a rationale for more financially constrained firms to engage in activities that increase their risk exposure.
Our findings that it is the smallest firms and those that are closest to financial distress in our sample that speculate the most should be disconcerting to shareholders and regulators, especially in the absence of evidence that selective hedging creates shareholder value.5 These findings naturally raise the question of how selective hedging is related to corporate governance. While our overall evidence on this question is weak, the strongest evidence we uncover is a positive relation between the extent of selective hedging and board size. This finding is consistent with the argument (see, for example, Yermack (1996)) that larger boards are less effective than smaller boards. Another related possibility is that the board puts compensation structures in place that perhaps inadvertently encourage some managers to speculate. For example, GÈczy, Minton and Schrand (2007) find that the sensitivity of CFO compensation to stock returns (delta) is positively associated with the probability of actively taking positions
5 See Adam and Fernando (2006), and Brown, Crabb and Haushalter (2006).
5

(although they find a negative relation for CEOs), In contrast, we find no evidence to suggest that selective hedging in our sample of firms is motivated by managerial compensation structures. This leaves open the question of why managers at smaller firms engage more in selective hedging than managers at larger firms. Graham and Harvey (2001) note that managers at smaller firms tend to be financially less sophisticated than managers at larger firms. Thus, managers at smaller firms may be more likely to erroneously believe that they have an information advantage when, in fact, they do not.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II we review briefly the literature on selective hedging and formulate our empirical hypotheses. Section III describes the data and our methodology. Sections IV and V discuss our analysis and present our findings. Section VI concludes.
II. Empirical Hypotheses The traditional theory of corporate risk management assumes that firms use derivatives
purely for hedging purposes, i.e., without any speculative motives, and that the benefits of hedging accrue solely from the alleviation of market imperfections.6 However, there is considerable survey evidence that managers also speculate with derivatives, i.e., incorporate their market views into their hedging programs. In a survey of 244 Fortune 500 firms, Dolde (1993) reports that almost 90% of firms at least sometimes base the size of their hedges on their views of future market movements. Bodnar, Hayt and Marston (1998) survey derivatives policies by 399 U.S. non-financial firms and find that about 50% of their sample firms admit to sometimes (and 10% frequently) altering the size and/or the timing of a hedge based on their market views.
6 See, for example, Stulz (1984), Smith and Stulz (1985), Stulz (1990), Froot, Scharfstein and Stein (1993), DeMarzo and Duffie (1995), and Mello and Parsons (2000).
6

Glaum (2002) surveys the risk management practices of the major non-financial firms in Germany. He finds that the majority follows forecast-based, profit-oriented risk management strategies. Faulkender (2005) examines whether firms are hedging or timing the market when selecting the interest rate exposures of their new debt issuances. He finds that the interest rate exposure chosen is a function of the slope of the yield curve. Chernenko and Faulkender (2011) document that the use of interest rate swaps to speculate by firms in their sample is linked to executive compensation contracts that are more performance sensitive. Adam and Fernando (2006) find considerable evidence of selective hedging in their sample of gold mining firms but find no economically significant cash flow gains on average from selective hedging. Brown, Crabb, and Haushalter (2006) also study selective hedging in the gold mining industry and arrive at a similar conclusion. Beber and Fabbri (2006) analyze the time-series variation of foreign currency derivatives in a sample of large U.S. non-financial firms and document a substantial time-series variation in currency derivatives holdings in excess of what can be explained by changes in currency exposure, which they attribute to selective hedging.
Collectively, these studies show that the practice of selective hedging is common in the corporate world. It is unclear, however, whether this practice is consistent with firm value maximization. According to Stulz (1996), a necessary condition for selective hedging to be value increasing is that the firm possesses valuable private information. He cites as an example a large copper consuming firm that obtains private information about the copper market as a result of its copper purchasing activities. Another example is a large gas pipeline and distribution company, which can acquire valuable information about gas demand and supply through the operation of its distribution network. The extent of private information a firm acquires is, of course, unobservable. However, it is plausible that larger firms have a greater potential to acquire
7

valuable information than smaller firms. The gold mining industry is no exception. The largest North American companies produce the most gold and operate globally, and therefore should have the highest potential for obtaining valuable information with respect to the future gold production and hence, the gold price. Therefore, all else equal, we expect larger firms to speculate more than smaller firms.
However, selective hedging exposes a firm to new risks because the firm's private information may be noisy or turn out to be incorrect. Stulz (1996) therefore predicts that only firms with sufficient financial strength will engage in selective hedging to benefit from a perceived information advantage. Financially less stable firms should refrain from incorporating their market views in order not to jeopardize their core businesses. This argument suggests that financially stronger firms will speculate more than financially weaker firms.
In contrast, Stulz (1996) further notes that wealth transfer motives, as in Jensen and Meckling (1976) and Myers (1977), would provide managers of financially distressed firms with an incentive to speculate regardless of whether or not they have an information advantage. In a similar vein, Campbell and Kracaw (1999) argue that financially constrained firms have an incentive to increase risk exposure to potentially supplement their internal cash reserves and thereby overcome their financial constraints. In contrast to the previously discussed prediction, these arguments imply that financially constrained or distressed firms speculate more than financially secure firms.
If selective hedging is motivated by asset substitution considerations, this would naturally raise the question of how selective hedging is related to corporate governance. For example, is corporate speculation positively related to less monitoring by the board? While valuemaximizing corporate governance structures can vary across firms as pointed out by Coles,
8

Lemmon and Wang (2009), identifying any systematic relationships that may exist between
speculation and governance will be informative.
Compensation structures may also affect a manager's willingness to take speculative
gambles. Tufano (1996) shows that stock options reduce the likelihood that managers will hedge
a firm's risk exposure. By induction and as argued by GÈczy, Minton and Schrand (2007) and
Beber and Fabbri (2006), stock options may cause some managers to become more risk tolerant
and engage in explicit market timing activities that further increase stock price volatility, especially those with large stock option portfolios.7 Therefore, we expect to find a positive
relationship between speculation and the sensitivity of executives' compensation packages to
their firm's stock price volatility.
III. Data and Methodology
We study the derivatives transactions of a sample of 92 North American gold mining
firms. The derivatives data is from the Gold and Silver Hedge Outlook, a quarterly survey
conducted by Ted Reeve, an analyst at Scotia McLeod, from 1989 to 1999. Unfortunately, this survey was discontinued in 1999, which limits our study to the 1989-1999 period.8 The firms
included in the survey represent the majority of firms in the gold mining industry during this
period. Firms that are not included tend to be small or privately held corporations.
7 Based on the survey data collected by Bodnar, Hayt and Marston (1998), GÈczy, Minton and Schrand (2007) find that the sensitivity of CFO compensation to stock returns (delta) is positively associated with the probability of actively taking positions, while the sensitivity of CEO compensation to stock returns is negatively related to speculation. Beber and Fabbri (2006) also examine the link between CEO compensation and selective hedging for a sample of large U.S. non-financial firms with foreign currency exposure. They document a weakly positive relation between CEO delta or vega and selective hedging, although they also show that managers whose compensation is tied to stock return volatility will hedge less. 8 To our knowledge, this is still the best available data set to systematically study corporate speculation with derivatives. Tufano (1996) studies 48 gold mining firms using quarterly data between 1991 and 1993 from the Ted Reeve survey while Brown, Crabb and Haushalter (2006) study 44 gold mining firms using quarterly data between 1993 and 1998 from the same survey.
9

The Scotia McLeod survey contains detailed quarterly information on all outstanding gold derivatives positions, i.e., the type of instrument, the size and direction of the position, average delivery prices and maturities for each instrument type, and the future expected gold production. There are a total of 2,541 firm-quarter observations of which 1,450 firm-quarters represent non-zero hedging portfolios. Tufano (1996) and Adam and Fernando (2006) provide further details about this data set.
Following Tufano (1996), we measure the extent of derivatives usage by a hedge ratio for

each firm i and time t ( hitp ) that is defined as follows:

Total

hedge

ratio

(

production

)



 Portfolio delta (1- 3 year contracts ) Expected production (1- 3 year ahead )

(1)

The portfolio delta is the amount of gold that the firm has effectively sold short, computed as the sum of the deltas of all of a firm's gold derivatives positions (in ounces of gold).9 Expected production is a firm's expected gold production over the next three years. Thus, this hedge ratio represents the fraction of gold production over the next three years that has been hedged.
Since some variation in the hedge ratio may be caused by firms revising their expectations about their future gold production, we also calculate an alternate hedge ratio that reflects the fraction of a firm's total gold reserves that has been hedged, as in Jin and Jorion (2006). This ratio ( hirt ) is defined as follows:

9 The survey reports derivatives contracts with maturities of up to five years. However, since only a few firms use four and five year hedges ≠ the average contract maturity is 1.5 years ≠ we focus our attention on derivatives contracts that mature within three years. Including four and five year maturities does not change any of our conclusions. The results are available from the authors upon request.
10

Total hedge ratio ( reserves )   Portfolio delta (1- 3 year contracts ) Total gold reserves

(2)

Gold reserves in ounces of gold are collected manually from firms' financial statements. Following Haushalter (2000) and Adam and Fernando (2006), our methodology for
measuring selective hedging explicitly accounts for the fact that hedging involves two sequential decisions: (a) to hedge or not to hedge; and (b) conditional on the decision to hedge, how much to hedge. We use a Heckman (1979) two-step model to reflect this two-stage decision process and control for any selection bias associated with estimating the speculation of firms that hedge. In the first stage, we estimate a probit regression to model the likelihood that a firm hedges. We calculate an Inverse Mills ratio from the first stage results, which we include in the second stage regression that models the extent to which firms hedge their gold production.10 As in Adam and

Fernando (2006), this procedure gives us predicted hedge ratios ( h^it ) for each firm i and time t.

Next, we measure the extent of selective hedging by the yearly standard deviation of the

quarterly residuals (eit) from the second step regression of the Heckman two-step model:

   Total speculation ( production )i 

1 4
4 t1

eipt

2



1 4
4 t1

hitp  h^itp

2

(3)

   Total speculation ( reserves )i 

1 4
4 t1

eirt

2


1 4
4 t1

hirt  h^irt

2

(4)

Adam and Fernando (2006) measure the extent of speculation by the deviation of the
actual hedge ratio from a predicted hedge ratio, i.e., a hedge ratio derived from a pure hedging
10 The Heckman (1979) two-step methodology requires at least one explanatory variable in the first stage that is not included in the second stage. In the first stage, we include firm size, market-to-book ratio, dividend policy, quick ratio, and leverage. In the second stage, we include all those variables except for leverage. We also investigated the effect of omitting other first-stage variables in the second stage but the results were substantively similar. We also include quarterly dummy variables in the second stage to account for seasonality in hedging. These variables are estimated following Adam and Fernando (2006).
11

paradigm, using five different methods, including the two methods we use here. They find that the five methods yield broadly similar results.
Brown, Crabb and Haushalter (2006) use the standard deviation of quarterly hedge ratios to measure the extent of speculation. We also follow their methodology and calculate two further measure of speculation, which are defined as follows:

 Total speculation p (robustness)i 

1 4
4 t1

hitp  hi p

2

(5)

 Total speculationr (robustness)i 

1 4
4 t1

hirt  hir

2

(6)

We obtain financial data from Compustat or from a manual search of firms' financial statements if a firm is not covered by Compustat. Stock prices are obtained from CRSP. This data is used to calculate measures of firm size, market-to-book ratio of assets, leverage, liquidity, dividend policy, Altman's (1968) Z-score, and Ohlson's (1980) O-score. All variable definitions are provided in Appendix I. Table 1 provides summary statistics of our sample.
[Place Table 1 about here] Altman (1968) shows that firms with Z-scores less than 1.81 are associated with a "high" probability of distress, whereas firms with Z-scores above 2.99 are in the "safe zone." The descriptive statistics in Panel A of Table 1 show that while the mean and median Z-scores in our sample are 2.54 and 2.46, respectively, the 10th and 90th percentiles are 0 and 5.11 Thus, despite the industry focus, the firms in our sample exhibit a wide range of probabilities of bankruptcy with approximately a third having Z-scores below 1.81. Our O-score summary statistics are quite
11 We winsorize the Z-scores at zero on the left and five on the right to prevent our results from being influenced by extreme values.
12

similar to those reported by Dichev (1998), who uses the universe of post-1980 industrial firms in his study. For example, the mean and standard deviation of O-scores in our sample are -1.41 and 3.69 respectively, compared to -1.44 and 3.19 in Dichev (1998).12 Leverage averages 42% in our sample, and 43% of our firm-year observations are for dividend payers. We observe considerable variation in firm characteristics across our sample firms.
The descriptive statistics in Panel B of Table 1 show that 74% of our sample firms are hedgers. Among hedgers, an average of 44% of their expected gold production is short sold in advance over a three-year horizon. For this same sample of hedgers, average hedge ratios decline from 49% for one-year maturities to 21% for three-year maturities, indicating that most of the derivatives activity takes place in shorter maturity contracts.
We also collect data on several corporate governance measures that have been used in the literature. We collect data from proxy statements about the size of the board of directors,13 the percentage of outsiders on the board of directors,14 board classification (a dummy variable equal to one if the board is staggered and zero otherwise),15 the tenure of CEOs,16 and institutional ownership in the firm.17 Outside directors are directors who are neither executives nor individuals who are likely to have a business relationship with the firm, such as lawyers or bankers. We also identify CEOs that also hold the position of chairman of the board.18 We hand collect the age of firms since incorporation from various issues of the Mergent's industrial
12 As with the Z-scores, we truncate O-scores at the 1% level to avoid the possibility of extreme observations driving our results. 13 See, for example, Jensen (1993), Yermack (1996), Coles, Daniel and Naveen (2008), and Linck, Netter and Yang (2008). 14 See, for example, Weisbach (1988), Brickley, Coles, and Terry (1994), and Coles, Daniel and Naveen (2006). 15 See, for example, Faleye (2007), and Ahn, Goyal, and Shrestha (2008). 16 See, for example, Hermalin and Weisbach (1988), and Ryan and Wiggins (2004). 17 See, for example, Shleifer and Vishny (1986), Carleton, Nelson and Weisbach (1998), Gillan and Starks (2000), and Hartzell and Starks (2003). 18 See, for example, Fama and Jensen (1983), Jensen (1993), and Brickley, Coles, and Jarrell (1997).
13

manual, bank & finance manual, and OTC manual, all published by Moody's Investors Service. If the data are unavailable from these sources, we examine company histories using Hoovers.
The descriptive statistics in Panel C of Table 1 show that board sizes mostly vary between 6 and 13 board members, with a median of 8 directors. Of these, 71% are outside directors. About 29% of the boards in the sample are staggered, and about half of the CEOs also hold the title of chairman of the board. Institutions own on average 21% of the equity of our sample firms.
Finally, we gather compensation data from ExecuComp or through manual collection from proxy statements if the firm is not covered by ExecuComp. We also obtain the stock and option holdings for CEOs and CFOs. We then estimate the sensitivities of stock and option holdings to changes in stock price level (delta) and volatility (vega) following the methodology of Core and Guay (2002). We use the end of year stock price from Compustat as the underlying stock price in the Black-Scholes options pricing formula. We obtain any cash dividends paid by the firm from Compustat. The risk-free interest rate is the yield on the Treasury bond whose maturity is closest to the maturity of the stock option. We compute stock return volatility from weekly adjusted stock returns obtained from CRSP and Datastream. We calculate the delta of each executive's compensation as the sum of the deltas of all outstanding options plus the delta of the executive's shareholdings. We calculate the vega of the executive's compensation as the sum of the vegas of all option holdings of the executive. Following Coles, Daniel and Naveen (2006), we assume the vega of shareholdings to be zero. Appendix I provides further details on the calculation of delta and vega. We use lagged compensation data in all our regressions.
14

A. Estimation of Speculation Measures To compute our measures of speculation, we must first model the magnitude of hedging
by firms. Since the decision to use derivatives is not random, it is possible that our hedging sample may be subject to sample selection bias. To control for this potential selection bias, we estimate Heckman (1979) two-step selection models. The first step models the decision to use derivatives using a standard probit model. We use several explanatory variables that have been identified in the prior literature as determinants of hedging. These variables include firm size, the market-to-book ratio of assets, dividend policy, liquidity and leverage.19 The second step models the magnitude of hedging via OLS, using the Inverse Mills Ratio as an additional regressor to correct for any sample selection bias.20 We also add quarterly dummy variables to control for any predictable intra-year time series variation in hedge ratios. The sample in the second step is limited to derivatives users only.
Results of the Heckman (1979) two-step regressions are presented in Table 2. Consistent with prior studies we observe a strong positive relation between the likelihood of using derivatives and firm size (statistically significant at the 1% level for all model specifications).21 Furthermore, we find negative relations between the market-to-book ratio and the decision to use derivatives, which is consistent with the evidence in Mian (1996). The market-to-book ratio is widely used as a proxy for growth opportunities. In the mining industry it is likely to proxy for the magnitude of a firm's gold price exposure. Firms with fewer growth opportunities have more developed mines in operation and thus larger gold price exposures stemming from future gold sales than firms with more growth opportunities. We also find that the decision to use derivatives
19 See, for example, Tufano (1996), Mian (1996) and Haushalter (2000). 20 We use robust standard errors in the second step of the two-step procedure following Heckman (1979). 21 See, for example, Tufano (1996), Mian (1996), Bodnar, Hayt and Marston (1998), Haushalter (2000) and Adam and Fernando (2006).
15

is negatively correlated with both corporate liquidity and whether or not a firm pays dividends. Holding liquidity can be seen as a substitute for hedging, which would explain the negative correlation between the decision to use derivatives and the quick ratio. Overall, these results are consistent with Tufano (1996) and Adam (2002).
[Place Table 2 about here] Next, we use the residuals from the second stage regression to calculate the total speculation measures according to equations (3) and (4). Panel B of Table 1 shows descriptive statistics of the two speculation measures.
IV. Characteristics of Firms that Hedge Selectively In this section, we examine how selective hedging is related to firm size, the probability
of bankruptcy, and a number of corporate governance variables. After obtaining our primary speculation measures from the Heckman two-step regressions described in the previous section, we estimate our regressions using OLS, controlling for firm-level clustering in all our tests to avoid biased standard errors (Petersen, 2009). We conclude with robustness checks using alternate speculation measures and alternate measures of a firm's potential information advantage.
A. Speculation, Firm Size and the Probability of Bankruptcy Table 3 presents the results on how speculation is related to firm characteristics,
including its corporate governance characteristics. In this subsection, we focus specifically on how firm size, as a proxy for inside information about the gold market, and Altman's Z-score and Ohlson's (1980) O-score, as measures of the probability of bankruptcy, are related to the
16

extent of speculation. The results in Table 3 show that smaller firms speculate more than larger firms. For example, an increase in firm size by one standard deviation from the mean is associated with a decrease in total speculation (reserves) by around 0.0191. We obtain substantively similar results for our other speculation measures. Given that the mean value of total speculation (reserves) is only 0.03, this represents a reduction of 64%. This finding is especially remarkable in light of the fact that it is typically the larger firms that are more likely to hedge and hedge more of their gold production than smaller firms.
[Place Table 3 about here] As noted in Section II, the theoretical relation between selective hedging and the likelihood of financial distress is ambiguous. Stulz (1996) highlights the need for firms that engage in selective hedging to have the financial strength to bear the additional risk of acting on their market views. On the other hand, Stulz (1996) and Campbell and Kracaw (1999) provide different reasons as to why financially distressed firms could have more incentives to speculate than financially secure firms. To test for this potential convexity, we allow for the relationship between speculation and Z-scores/O-scores to be non-linear by including the square of Zscores/O-scores. Our tests support the argument that speculation is positively related to the likelihood of financial distress. The relationship between speculation and Z-score is negative and statistically significant at the 5% level or better in all our specifications. Since the Z-score decreases with the probability of bankruptcy, this finding confirms that firms with a higher probability of bankruptcy speculate more. We obtain consistent results using O-scores although the coefficients are statistically significant (at the 5% level) only for one of our two speculation measures. O-
17

scores increase with the probability of bankruptcy and we observe a positive significant coefficient between total speculation (production) and O-scores.
We also observe some evidence of convexity in the relationship when we use Z-scores to proxy for bankruptcy risk. The coefficient on the Z2 term is positive and statistically significant at the 5% level or better in all our specifications. In contrast, the coefficient on O2 does not have a consistent sign and has lower levels of statistical significance. Furthermore, the economic magnitude of the coefficient on the Z2 term is small. This implies that we are estimating mostly the downward-sloping part of a quadratic relation rather than a symmetric U-shaped relation. For example, total speculation measured using either production or reserves is minimized at Z scores that are slightly above 3.5. In both cases, approximately 70% of the corresponding sample firms have Z scores below this value. Taking account of the convexity, a decrease in the Z-score from 2 to 1 is associated with an increase in total speculation (reserves) by 0.021, which represents an increase of 70% relative to the mean value of total speculation. In contrast, an increase in the Zscore from 4 to 5 is associated with an increase in total speculation (reserves) of 0.0037, an increase of only 12% relative to the mean. Therefore, while decreases in the Z-score for low values of Z lead to economically significant increases in speculation, the increases in speculation associated with Z-score increases for high values of Z are considerably more modest. A similarly stark asymmetry between the two sides of the U-shape is observed when we use total speculation (production), which confirms that we are, indeed, estimating mostly the downward-sloping part of the quadratic relation. As a consequence of this convex relation, for firms facing higher probabilities of financial distress (roughly the bottom two-thirds of our sample ranked by Zscore) we find support for the arguments in Stulz (1996) and Campbell and Kracaw (1999) that financially distressed firms will speculate more than financially secure firms.
18

If financially distressed firms speculate more than financially secure firms, we would also expect to find that speculation causes higher stock return volatility, which would be consistent with the motive that drives these firms to speculate in the first place. We test for this possibility by examining how lagged changes in speculation are related to changes in stock return volatility after controlling for a variety of other determinants of stock return volatility. The results are reported in Table 4. The coefficient on the lagged speculation change is positive and statistically significant at the 5% level or better for total speculation (production), at the 1% level for 2-year speculation and at the 10% level for one of our total speculation (reserves) specifications. While the other coefficients are not statistically significant, these results provide considerable support for the notion that corporate speculation may be motivated at least in part by wealth transfer reasons or to overcome financial constraints.22
[Place Table 4 about here]
B. Discussion We find that larger firms are more likely to hedge than smaller firms, and hedge more of
their production than smaller firms. These findings are consistent with prior studies, and may indicate that larger firms are more sophisticated and can commit greater financial resources and expertise to a risk management program than smaller firms. In contrast, we find that smaller firms speculate more than larger firms. This finding is puzzling because larger firms should be more likely to have an information advantage about the gold market than smaller firms and therefore, if firms speculate based on superior information, we would expect to see a higher propensity to engage in selective hedging among larger firms. It is possible that smaller firms are
22 We also have examined the relation between Tobin's Q and selective hedging, and find that it is either insignificant or negative depending on model specification. The results are not reported but are available on request.
19

more likely to erroneously believe that they have information the market does not have, when in fact they do not, which is consistent with the view stemming from Graham and Harvey (2001) that smaller firms are financially less sophisticated than larger firms.
Our findings are also consistent with the argument in Campbell and Kracaw (1999). Smaller firms are more constrained in raising external capital due to asymmetric information, and may engage in selective hedging in the hope of supplementing their smaller internal resources. Additionally, our finding that among financially weaker firms, those that have a higher probability of bankruptcy speculate more lends support to the Stulz (1996) agencytheoretic notion that shareholders of firms close to bankruptcy may have incentives to speculate at the cost of bondholders.
C. Selective Hedging and Corporate Governance Characteristics The findings in Adam and Fernando (2006) and Brown, Crabb, and Haushalter (2006),
that selective hedging is not value increasing for shareholders, also raise the question of how selective hedging is related to corporate governance. Is there a systematic association between specific governance characteristics and an activity that seemingly creates no value for shareholders? Unfortunately, the availability of corporate governance data for our sample of firms is considerably limited and restricts the extent of analysis we can carry out to address this issue.
Table 3 also presents the results of our analysis of how selective hedging is related to (a) several board characteristics, (b) CEO tenure, and (c) institutional ownership. While some of our results are relatively weak and while the normative assessment of our results are subject to the caution advanced by Coles, Lemmon and Wang (2009) about the pitfalls of interpreting
20

performance on structure models, we highlight a few noteworthy relationships between selective hedging and corporate governance measures. The coefficient for board size is positive and statistically significant at the 5% level or better for both measures of total speculation. These results suggest that firms with larger boards speculate more than firms with smaller boards. We also find that the coefficient for the staggered board dummy is negative and significant at the 5% level for total speculation in model I. This finding suggests that firms with staggered boards speculate less. Board independence and CEO duality do not seem to affect speculation in our study. The coefficient for CEO tenure, while negative in all four specifications, is only statistically significant in models III and IV.
We repeat our tests by including firm-level fixed effects to allow for the possibility that our previous results may be driven by omitted variables. We do so by including firm-level fixed effects in the second step of the Heckman two-step procedure before we estimate the residuals with which we calculate our measure of speculation. We then obtain these new residuals and reestimate speculation as before. We present the results of our analysis with this alternative measure of speculation in models V-VIII of Table 3. All our results are virtually unchanged when we add fixed effects to the second step of the Heckman two-step regression.
D. Discussion Overall, our results show that speculation is weakly related to a number of corporate
governance measures. Among the strongest of these relationships is the finding that firms with larger boards speculate more than firms with smaller boards. In the absence of any evidence of a positive relation between speculation and shareholder value, these results also complement our earlier findings about the positive association between the likelihood of financial distress and
21

corporate speculation, and suggest that the value-maximizing drivers of selective hedging postulated by Stulz (1996) are not at work in our sample of firms.
E. Robustness In this subsection, we perform additional empirical tests to further examine the
robustness of the previously presented findings to the use of (a) alternate speculation measures and (b) alternate measures of a firm's potential information advantage.
We first carry out robustness checks using our alternate measure of speculation. Following Brown, Crabb and Haushalter (2006), we use the standard deviation of quarterly hedge ratios to measure the extent of speculation. As before, we carry out the analysis using the Heckman (1979) two-step procedure except that unlike before, we directly model speculation in the second stage.23 We present the second step results in Table 5. The results are consistent with the results reported in Table 3. Speculation continues to be negatively related to Firm size and Z score in most models. Speculation is weakly positively related to O-scores for total speculation (production). In addition, Z2 is positive and statistically significant in all specifications except for 1- and 2-year speculation. As in Table 3, board size is positively related to speculation for total speculation in models II-IV (statistically significant at the 1% level). As before, board independence and CEO-chair duality are not significant here. Our results are consistent with our finding in Table 3 that firms with larger boards speculate more than firms with smaller boards. The staggered board dummy is negative in model I. While institutional ownership was not significantly related to speculation in Table 3, with our alternate measure of speculation
23 Because we calculate the standard deviation of hedge ratios before running the second step in the Heckman twostep procedure, we are left with significantly fewer observations for the second-step regression, which makes it impossible to include firm fixed effects in this specification.
22

institutional ownership is negatively related to speculation at the 5% level, providing weak evidence to suggest that institutions help monitor executives to reduce speculation.
[Place Table 5 about here] We have argued that firm size is a reasonable proxy for a firm's information advantage because larger firms have better access to information through their more extensive market presence, and because they would also typically have more expertise and other resources to acquire any information they may need. In this section, we also explore whether our previous findings are robust to the use of two alternate measures of a firm's potential information advantage.24 Since the information advantage in our case pertains to the future price of gold, we use a firm's annual gold production and gold reserves as two alternate measures of information advantage. Because some of the firms in our sample are also engaged in the mining of other metals and commodities, gold production and reserves have the potential to provide more precise measures of a firm's footprint in the gold market, albeit at the cost of diluting other drivers of information advantage such as management quality and other sources of in-house expertise, and access to external information resources. The results presented in Table 6, although weaker than the results using firm size (in part due to smaller sample sizes), are consistent with our previous conclusions using firm size as a proxy for information advantage. In Panel A, production and reserves are negatively related to the level of speculation for total speculation (reserves) at the 10% and 1% levels, respectively. The previous findings for Z-score and O-score continue to hold robustly for most of the specifications. Board size continues to be positively and significantly related to speculation in models I-IV.
24 In unreported work we also examine firm age and CEO tenure as potential measures of information advantage and obtain broadly similar results.
23

[Place Table 6 about here]
V. Selective Hedging and Managerial Compensation In this section, we examine the possibility that selective hedging may be a rational
managerial response to incentive compensation. As noted in Section II, if selective hedging increases the volatility of a firm's stock, managers who hold a significant number of stock options may be more inclined to speculate than managers with few or no stock options because the value of options increases with volatility. If so, we would expect to find a positive relation between speculation and the sensitivity of executives' compensation packages to their firm's stock price volatility. On the other hand, Adam and Fernando (2006) and Brown, Crabb and Haushalter (2006) show that firms do not earn economically significant cash flows on average from selective hedging, which implies that corporate speculation does not create shareholder value. If this is common knowledge among a firm's managers, we would expect corporate speculation to decrease with the sensitivity of managerial stock and option holdings to the firm's stock price.
Managerial ownership of the firm can be obtained through holding stock as well as stock options, which we measure by the sum of the deltas of stock and option holdings of the CEO or the CFO. We measure the sensitivity of stock option holdings to changes in the stock price volatility by calculating the aggregate vega of the option holdings of the CEO or CFO.
The results for CEO and CFO compensation are presented in Table 7. None of the four compensation coefficients (CEO delta, CEO vega, CFO delta and CFO vega) are statistically significant in any of our specifications.
[Place Table 7 about here]
24

A. Discussion Our finding that speculation is unrelated to the vega of option holdings by either CEOs
and CFOs provides no support for the view that stock option ownership could motivate managers to speculate in order to increase stock return volatility and thus increase the value of their stock options. Our finding that speculation does not increase with vega is especially significant in light of the result reported in Table 4 that speculation increases stock price volatility, and runs counter to the findings in recent studies by Burns and Kedia (2006) and Denis, Hanouna and Sarin (2006) that stock option compensation is positively related to the likelihood that managers will engage in strategies that potentially hurt shareholders. Burns and Kedia (2006) find that the sensitivity of the CEO's option portfolio to stock price is significantly positively related to the propensity to misreport earnings, while Denis, Hanouna and Sarin (2006) find that stock options increase the incentive for managers to engage in fraudulent activity. It is possible that their awareness that selective hedging does not create value, coupled with their own stakes in the firm, deter executives who own options and stock from engaging in speculation.
VI. Conclusions There is considerable evidence that firms use derivatives not only to hedge but also to
speculate. We examine whether this practice of selective hedging is consistent with the two economic criteria stipulated by Stulz (1996) for this activity to create value: (a) possession of private information by firms; and (b) possession of sufficient financial strength to take the additional risk that selective hedging imposes. We also examine the alternative possibility that firms engage in selective hedging activities due to asset substitution motives.
25

We find a negative relation between selective hedging and firm size, implying that smaller firms speculate more than larger firms. Since small firms generally have less private information than large firms due to their smaller footprint and paucity of resources to generate information, this finding is the opposite of what a theory of rational selective hedging based on an information advantage would predict. Our finding of a positive relation between the extent of selective hedging and the probability of financial distress lends support to the alternative explanation that selective hedging is largely driven by wealth transfer motives.
We also find weak relationships between speculation and some measures of corporate governance, of which the most robust is our finding that firms with larger boards speculate more than firms with smaller boards. We find no evidence to suggest that speculation is driven by managerial compensation, which is especially significant in light of our finding that stock price volatility is positively related to speculation.
Taken together, our findings suggest that the speculation undertaken by firms in our study may be driven by wealth transfer or financial constraints motives. Nonetheless, our study does not rule out the remaining possibility for selective hedging highlighted by Stulz (1996) -- that managers hedge selectively because they erroneously believe that they can outperform the market. While pointing to specific types of firms that are more likely to engage in selective hedging and specific motives that may drive selective hedging, our study renews the challenge of rationalizing a practice that provides no documented benefit to shareholders or managers. Our findings also have potential normative implications from the standpoint of both corporate governance and the regulatory oversight of public corporations.
26

Appendix I: Definition of Variables
This Appendix lists all the variables used in the paper, provides their definitions and explains how they are constructed. In addition to the 1989 to 1999 gold derivatives data set from the Gold and Silver Hedge Outlook by Ted Reeve/Scotia McLeod, the principal data sources are Compustat, CRSP, ExecuComp, firms' annual reports and 10-K forms. Market data is obtained from Datastream.
Altman's (1968) Z-score: Defined as: Z  1.20* X1 1.40* X2  3.30* X3  0.60* X4  0.999* X5
where X1 = working capital (current assets ≠ current liabilities)/total assets; X2 = retained earnings/total assets; X3 = earnings before interest and taxes/total assets; X4 = market value of equity/ book value of total debt; and X5 = sales/total assets.
Board size: The number of individuals on the board of directors.
CEO/CFO compensation delta and vega: CEO/CFO (aggregate) compensation delta is the change in the dollar value of the executive's wealth derived from ownership of stock and stock options in the firm when the firm's stock price changes by one percent. CEO/CFO (aggregate) compensation vega is the change in the dollar value of the executive's wealth derived from ownership of stock and stock options in the firm when the annualized standard deviation of the firm's stock price changes by 0.01. We calculate the (aggregate) delta of the executive's compensation as the sum of the deltas of the options holdings and the delta of the stock holdings. We obtain the (aggregate) vega of the executive's compensation as the sum of the vegas of the executive's options holdings. Following Coles, Daniel and Naveen (2006) we disregard the vega of stock holdings. The delta and vega of options holdings are calculated based on the methodology in Guay (1999) and Core and Guay (2002).25
The deltas of stock and options holdings are given by:
25 Following the convention in previous studies, while all the delta and vega measures we use in our analysis are aggregates over the executive's entire holdings in the firm, we omit using the qualifier "aggregate" when referring to compensation deltas and vegas elsewhere in the paper.
27

Delta (stock holdings) = 0.01*S*number of shares owned

(A.1)

Delta (options holdings) = 0.01* edT N (Z ) S * number of options owned

(A.2)

where Z = (ln (S/X) + T (r - d + 2/2))/(T 0.5)

S = underlying stock price

X = option exercise price

T = time to maturity of the option (number of years)

r = ln [1 + risk-free interest rate]

d = ln [1 + expected dividend rate on the stock]

 = annualized stock return volatility

N = cumulative density function for normal distribution

The vega of options holdings is given by:

Vega (options holdings) = 0.01* edT N ' (Z ) ST 0.5 * number of options owned

(A.3)

where N = probability density function for normal distribution

CEO-Chair duality: This dummy variable is equal to one if the CEO also has the title of chairman of the board.

CEO tenure: The number of years the executive has served as CEO of the firm.

Dividend dummy: Equals one if a firm paid cash dividends in the given year and is zero otherwise.

Firm age: Age of the firm since incorporation.

Firm size: The natural logarithm of the market value of assets. The market value of assets equals book value of assets minus book value of common stock plus market value of equity.

Hedging dummy: Equals one if a firm is hedging (using derivatives) in a specific time period and is zero otherwise. Total hedging dummy equals one if a firm uses derivatives with 1-3 years

28

to maturity and equals zero otherwise. x-year hedging dummy equals one if a firm uses derivatives with x-year maturity and equals zero otherwise.
Hedge ratio: The total hedge ratio is the fraction of the firm's expected gold production (or reserves) over the next three years that it has hedged, calculated as the ratio of the portfolio delta for derivatives contracts that mature within three years to expected production (in ounces of gold) over the same three-year time period. Correspondingly, x-year hedge ratio is the fraction of the x-year expected gold production hedged.
Institutional ownership: The percentage of the firm that is owned by institutions as reported in proxy statements.
Leverage: Calculated as the book value of long-term debt divided by the sum of book values of preferred stock, common equity, and long-term debt.
Market-to-book ratio of assets: Market value of assets divided by book value of assets. The market value of assets equals the book value of assets minus the book value of common stock plus market value of equity.
Ohlson's O score: Defined based on Ohlson (1980) as: O = -1.32 - 0.407 log (total assets / GNP price-level index) + 6.03 (total liabilities / total assets) - 1.43 (working capital / total assets) + 0.076 (current liabilities / current assets) - 1.72 (1 if total liabilities > total assets, else 0) - 2.37 (net income / total assets) - 1.83 (funds from operations/total liabilities) + 0.285 (1 if net loss for last two years, else 0) - 0.521 (net incomet - net incomet-1)/(|net incomet| + |net incomet-1|). Outside director ratio: The percentage of outside directors in the board of directors. Outside directors are those directors who are not employees of the firm or of banks or law firms that provide services to the firm.
Portfolio delta: Portfolio delta is the amount of gold that the firm has effectively sold short over a specific time period, computed as the sum of the firm's individual derivatives positions (in ounces of gold) weighted by their respective deltas.
Production: Amount of gold produced by the firm during the year (in thousands of ounces).
29

Quick ratio: Measure of corporate liquidity defined by the ratio: (cash + cash equivalents + receivables) / current liabilities. Reserves: Proven reserves of gold (in thousands of ounces) owned by the firm at the end of the fiscal year. Speculation: Speculation is the yearly standard deviation of quarterly hedge ratio residuals from a Heckman (1979) two-step regression. In the first step of the Heckman two-step regression, the dependent variable is a hedging dummy that is equal to one if the firm hedges during the year and zero otherwise. The dependent variable in the second stage is the proportion of expected production or reserves that is hedged. Total speculation (production) is based on the total hedge ratio (production) and total speculation (reserves) is based on the total hedge ratio (reserves). An alternate measure of speculation ≠ the yearly standard deviation of the quarterly total hedge ratios ≠ is used in robustness checks. Staggered board dummy: A dummy variable equal to one if the firm has staggered elections for directors and zero otherwise.
30

References
Adam, Tim R. and Chitru S. Fernando, 2006, Hedging, Speculation, and Shareholder Value, Journal of Financial Economics 81, 283-309.
Adam, Tim R., 2002, Do Firms Use Derivatives to Reduce Their Dependence on External Capital Markets? European Finance Review 6, 163-187.
Ahn, Seoungpil, Vidhan K. Goyal and Keshab Shrestha, 2008, The Differential Effects of Classified Boards on Firm Value, Working Paper.
Altman, Edward I., 1968, "Financial Ratios, Discriminant Analysis and the Prediction of Corporate Bankruptcy," Journal of Finance 23, 589-609.
Beber, Alessandro and Daniela Fabbri, 2006, Who Times the Foreign Exchange Market? Corporate Speculation and CEO Characteristics. Working Paper.
Bodnar, Gordon M., Gregory S. Hayt and Richard C. Marston, 1998 Wharton Survey of Derivatives Usage by U.S. Non-Financial Firms, Financial Management 27(4), 70-91.
Brickley, J.A., Coles, J.L. and Terry, R.L., 1994. Outside directors and the adoption of poison pills, Journal of Financial Economics 35, 371-390.
Brickley, J.A., Coles, J.L. and Jarrell, G., 1997. Leadership Structure: Separating the CEO and Chairman of the Board. Journal of Corporate Finance 3, 189-220.
Brown, Gregory W., Peter R. Crabb, and David Haushalter, 2006, Are Firms Successful at Selective Hedging? Journal of Business 79, 2925≠2949.
Burns, Natasha, and Simi Kedia, 2006, The Impact of Performance-Based Compensation on Misreporting, Journal of Financial Economics 79, 35-67.
Campbell, Tim S. and William A. Kracaw, 1999, Optimal Speculation in the Presence of Costly External Financing. In "Corporate Risk: Strategies and Management," Gregory Brown and Donald Chew, editors, Risk Publications, London.
Carleton, Willard T., James M. Nelson, and Michael S. Weisbach, 1998. The influence of institutions on corporate governance through private negotiations: Evidence from TIAA-CREF, Journal of Finance 53, 1335-1362.
Chernenko, Sergey, and Michael W. Faulkender, 2011, The Two Sides of Derivatives Usage: Hedging and Speculating with Interest Rate Swaps, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.
Coles, Jeffrey L., Michael L. Lemmon, and Yan Wang, 2009, The Joint Determinants of Managerial Ownership, Board Independence, and Firm Performance, Working Paper.
Coles, Jeffrey L., Naveen D. Daniel, and Lalitha Naveen, 2006, Managerial Incentives and Risk Taking, Journal of Financial Economics 79, 431-468.
Coles, Jeffrey L., Naveen D. Daniel, and Lalitha Naveen, 2008, Boards: Does One Size Fit All? Journal of Financial Economics 87, 329-356.
31

Core, John and Wayne Guay, 2002, Estimating the Value of Employee Stock Option Portfolios and Their Sensitivities to Price and Volatility, Journal of Accounting Research 40, 613-630.
DeMarzo, Peter M. and Darrell Duffie, 1995, Corporate Incentives for Hedging and Hedge Accounting, Review of Financial Studies 8, 743-772.
Denis, David J., Paul Hanouna and Atulya Sarin, 2006, Is There a Dark side to Incentive Compensation? Journal of Corporate Finance 12, 467-488.
Dichev, Ilia D., 1998, Is the Risk of Bankruptcy a Systematic Risk? Journal of Finance 53, 1131-1147.
Dolde, Walter, 1993, The Trajectory of Corporate Financial Risk Management, Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 6, 33-41.
Faleye, Olubunmi, 2007, Classified Boards, Firm Value, and Managerial Entrenchment, Journal of Financial Economics, 83, 501-529.
Fama, E.F. and Jensen, M.C., 1983. Separation of Ownership and Control, Journal of Law and Economics 26, 301-325.
Faulkender, Michael W., 2005, Hedging or Market Timing? Selecting the Interest Rate Exposure of Corporate Debt, Journal of Finance 60, 931-962.
Froot, Kenneth A., David S. Scharfstein and Jeremy C. Stein, 1993, Risk Management: Coordinating Corporate Investment and Financing Policies, Journal of Finance 48, 1629-1658.
GÈczy, Christopher, Bernadette A. Minton, and Catherine M. Schrand, 2007, Taking a View: Corporate Speculation, Governance, and Compensation, Journal of Finance 62, 2405 - 2443.
Gillan, Stuart and Laura Starks, 2000, Corporate Governance Proposals and Shareholder Activism: The Role of Institutional Investors, Journal of Financial Economics 57, 275-305
Glaum, Martin, 2002, The Determinants of Selective Exchange Risk Management ≠ Evidence from German Non-Financial Corporations, Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 14, 108-121.
Graham, John R. and Campbell R. Harvey, 2001, The Theory and Practice of Corporate Finance: Evidence from the Field, Journal of Financial Economics 60, 187-243.
Guay, Wayne R., 1999, The Sensitivity of CEO Wealth to Equity Risk: An Analysis of the Magnitude and Determinants, Journal of Financial Economics 53, 43-71.
Hartzell, Jay C. and Laura T. Starks, 2003, Institutional Investors and Executive Compensation, Journal of Finance 58, 2351≠2374.
Haushalter, David, 2000, Financing Policy, Basis Risk, and Corporate Hedging: Evidence from Oil and Gas Producers, Journal of Finance 55, 107-152.
Heckman, James J., 1979, Sample Selection as a Specification Error, Econometrica 47, 153-161.
Hermalin, Benjamin E. and Michael S. Weisbach, 1988, The determinants of board composition, RAND Journal of Economics, 19, 589-606.
32

Jensen, Michael C. and William H. Meckling, 1976, Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership Structure, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305-360.
Jensen, Michael C., 1993. The Modern Industrial-Revolution, Exit, and the Failure of Internal Control-Systems, Journal of Finance 48, 831-880.
Jin, Yanbo and Philippe Jorion, 2006, Firm Value and Hedging: Evidence from U.S. Oil and Gas Producers, Journal of Finance 61: 893-919.
Linck, James S., Jeffry M. Netter, and Tina Yang, 2008, The Determinants of Board Structure, Journal of Financial Economics 87, 308-328.
Mello, Antonio and John Parsons, 2000, Hedging and Liquidity, Review of Financial Studies 13, 127-153.
Mian, Shehzad L., 1996, Evidence on Corporate Hedging Policy, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 31, 419-439.
Myers, Stewart C., 1977, Determinants of Corporate Borrowing, Journal of Financial Economics 5, 147-175.
Ohlson, James A., 1980, Financial Ratios and the Probabilistic Prediction of Bankruptcy, Journal of Accounting Research 18, 109≠131.
Petersen, Mitchell A., 2009, Estimating Standard Errors in Finance Panel Data Sets: Comparing Approaches, Review of Financial Studies 22, 435-480.
Ryan, Harley E., Wiggins, Roy A., 2004. Who is in whose pocket? Director compensation, board independence, and barriers to effective monitoring, Journal of Financial Economics 73, 497-524.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny, 1986, Large Shareholders and Corporate Control, Journal of Political Economy 94, 461-488.
Smith, Clifford, and RenÈ M. Stulz, 1985, The Determinants of Firms' Hedging Policies, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 20, 391-405.
Stulz, RenÈ M., 1984, Optimal Hedging Policies, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 19, 127-140.
Stulz, RenÈ M., 1990, Managerial Discretion and Optimal Financing Policies, Journal of Financial Economics 26, 3-27.
Stulz, RenÈ M., 1996, Rethinking Risk Management, Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 9, 8-24.
Tufano, Peter, 1996, Who Manages Risk? An Empirical Examination of Risk Management Practices in the Gold Mining Industry, Journal of Finance 51, 1097-1137.
Weisbach, Michael S., 1988. Outside Directors and CEO Turnover, Journal of Financial Economics 20, 431-460.
Yermack, David, 1996. Higher market valuation of companies with a small board of directors, Journal of Financial Economics 40, 185-211.
33

Table 1

Firm Characteristics, Derivatives Usage, Corporate Governance, and CEO/CFO Compensation

Characteristics

This table presents summary statistics of firm characteristics, derivatives usage, CEO/CFO compensation and

board characteristics for 92 North American gold mining companies between 1989 and 1999. Firm size is the log

of the market value of assets in millions of US$. Market-to-book ratio is the market value of assets divided by the

book value of assets. Dividend dummy is a dummy variable that equals one if a firm paid cash dividends in year t

and zero otherwise. Quick ratio equals [(cash + cash equivalents + receivables) / current liabilities]. Leverage is the

ratio of the book value of debt to the book value of preferred stock, common stock and long-term debt. Firm age is

the number of years since the firm's incorporation. Z-scores and O-scores are calculated following Altman (1968)

and Ohlson (1980), respectively. Total hedging dummy equals one if a firm uses derivatives in year t with 1-3

years to maturity and is equal to zero otherwise. Hedge ratio and predicted hedge ratio statistics are estimated only

for hedgers. Total hedge ratio is the fraction of the future 3-year expected gold production (or reserves) hedged

each quarter, calculated by dividing the 3-year portfolio delta by the expected production over the next three years

(or reserves). Total speculation is the yearly standard deviation of the quarterly residuals from a two-step Heckman

regression of hedging on firm characteristics. Institutional ownership is the percentage of the firm owned by

institutions as reported in proxy statements. CEO tenure is the tenure of the CEO in the firm. Board size is the

number of members in the board of directors. Outsider director ratio is the fraction of outside members in the board

of directors. Staggered dummy is equal to one if the board of directors is staggered and zero otherwise. CEO ≠

Chair duality is a dummy variable that equals one if the CEO is also the chairman of the board and zero otherwise.

CEO and CFO compensation deltas and vegas are calculated as in Core and Guay (2002).

Mean

Median Std. Dev

10th 90th Percentile Percentile

Obs.

Panel A. Firm Characteristics

Firm size

5.59 5.46 1.74 3.51 8.21 1993

Market-to-book ratio of assets

1.85 1.56

1.1

0.82

3.18 1993

Dividend dummy

0.43 0

0.5

0

1 1995

Quick Ratio

3.73 1.63

8.82

0.26

6.7 1966

Leverage

0.42 0.17 3.63 0 0.52 1976

Ohlson's O-score

-1.41 -1.76

3.69

-4.42

2.45

1318

Altman's Z-score

2.54 2.46

1.84

0

5 1595

Panel B. Derivatives Usage Characteristics

Total hedging dummy

0.74 1

0.44

0

1 2274

Total hedge ratio (quarterly)

0.44 0.34

0.39

0

0.98 615

Total hedge ratio (reserves) (quarterly) 0.08 0.05 0.11

0

0.2 1215

Total speculation

0.11 0.08

0.1

0.03

0.22

171

Total speculation (reserves)

0.03 0.01

0.05

0

0.06 293

Panel C. Corporate Governance
Board size Outsider director ratio Staggered board dummy CEO ≠ Chair duality CEO tenure Institutional ownership
Firm age

8.63 0.71 0.29 0.52 7.27 0.21
22.32

8 0.714
0 1 4 0.1
12

2.81 0.14 0.45 0.5 7.94 0.27
26.49

6 0.5 0 0 1 0
5

13 1264 0.89 1264
1 1316 1 1306 17 1450 0.71 1236
66 1019

Panel D. CEO/CFO Compensation Characteristics

Delta of CEO compensation ($000s)

288.53

Delta of CFO compensation ($000s)

74.94

Vega of CEO compensation ($000s)

53.57

Vega of CFO compensation ($000s)

8.94

23.57 13.44 7.38
3.04

1204.23 172.1 207.09
20.89

3.75 0.49 0.42
0.02

305.34 180.22 80.89
18

1059 545 1135
792

34

Table 2 Heckman Two-Step Analysis of Hedging

This table presents regression results of a Heckman (1979) two-step selection model. The first step (model I) models the decision to use derivatives and the second step (models II and III) models hedge ratios as a function of firm characteristics. The dependent variables in the first step are total hedging dummies that equal one if a firm uses derivatives with 1-3 years to maturity and equal zero otherwise. The dependent variable in the second step is either the total hedge ratio, which is the fraction of the future 3-year expected gold production (or reserves) hedged each quarter, calculated by dividing the 3-year portfolio delta by the expected production over the next three years (or reserves). Firm size is the log of the market value of assets in millions of US$. Market-to-book ratio is the market value of assets divided by the book value of assets. Dividend dummy is a dummy variable that equals one if a firm paid cash dividends in year t and zero otherwise. Quick ratio equals [(cash + cash equivalents + receivables) / current liabilities]. Leverage is the ratio of the book value of debt to the book value of preferred stock, common stock and long-term debt. Figures in parentheses denote tstatistics and *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1% levels respectively.

Firm Size Market to book Dividend dummy Quick ratio
Leverage
Inverse Mills ratio
Intercept Includes quarterly dummies Observations 2 Pr > 2

I Total Hedging
Dummy
0.454*** -12.58
-0.485*** (-9.606) -0.250** (-2.104) -0.00958* (-1.882) -0.151 (-0.801)
-1.271*** (-7.287)
No 1041 NA NA

II Total Hedge Ratio
(production)
0.0912* -1.682 -0.0649 (-0.914) -0.146*** (-3.614) -0.00878*** (-3.543)
0.00797 -0.0363 0.0148 -0.0455
Yes 615 282.4 (<0.001)

III Total Hedge Ratio
(reserves)
0.0437*** -5.341
-0.0644*** (-5.230)
-0.0484*** (-4.822)
-0.00471*** (-6.957)
0.262*** -4.408
-0.122*** (-2.673)
Yes 1215 239.8 (<0.001)

35

Table 3

Selective Hedging as a Function of Firm Characteristics, Board Characteristics, CEO

Tenure and Institutional Ownership

This table presents the regression results of speculation as a function of firm characteristics, board characteristics, CEO tenure and institutional ownership. Total speculation is the yearly standard deviation of the quarterly residuals from a two-step Heckman regression of hedging on firm characteristics. Firm size is the log of the market value of assets in millions of US$. Zscores and O-scores are calculated following Altman (1968) and Ohlson (1980), respectively. Institutional ownership is the percentage of the firm owned by institutions as reported in proxy statements. Staggered dummy is equal to one if the board of directors is staggered and zero otherwise. CEO-Chair duality is equal to one if the CEO is also the chairman of the board and zero otherwise. CEO tenure is the tenure of chief executive officers at their firms. Outside director ratio is the fraction of outsiders on the board of directors and board size is the number of directors on the board of directors. Figures in parentheses denote t-statistics estimated with standard errors adjusted for firm clustering following Petersen (2009) and *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1% levels respectively. The second stage in the Heckman two-step regression includes firm fixed effects for models V-VIII but not for models I-IV.

I II III IV

Total Speculation (production)

Total Speculation (reserves)

Total Speculation (production)

Total Speculation (reserves)

Panel A: Without firm fixed effects in second stage of Heckman regression

Firm size

-0.0232** (-2.062)

-0.0110*** (-4.090)

-0.0290* (-1.792)

-0.0159*** (-4.075)

Z score

-0.0681*** (-3.121)

-0.0294** (-2.572)

Z score2

0.00969*** -2.875

0.00413** -2.236

O score

0.0211** (2.112)

7.55e-05 (0.0394)

O score2

0.00355* (1.970)

-0.000897* (-1.721)

Board size

0.0153** -2.659

0.00627*** -3.907

0.0120* (1.965)

0.00571*** (3.188)

Outside director ratio

-0.0283 (-0.415)

-0.0413 (-1.315)

0.0404 (0.600)

-0.0341 (-0.826)

Staggered dummy

-0.0523** (-2.137)

0.00148 -0.153

-0.0458* (-1.751)

-0.00391 (-0.453)

CEO ≠ Chair duality CEO tenure

-0.0239 (-1.148) 0.000577
-0.33

-0.00594 (-0.990) -0.000519 (-0.965)

0.00421 (0.173) -0.000433 (-0.336)

0.000343 (0.0480) -0.000847 (-1.539)

Institutional ownership
Intercept

-0.0168 (-0.371) 0.251***
-3.433

-0.00237 (-0.206) 0.114***
-3.824

0.0133 (0.289) 0.185**
(2.432)

-0.000810 (-0.0737) 0.116***
(2.995)

Observations

117 206 119 202

R-squared

0.285

0.2

0.189

0.157

36

Table 3 -- continued

V VI VII

Total Speculation (production)

Total Speculation (reserves)

Total Speculation (production)

Panel B: With firm fixed effects in second stage of Heckman regression

Firm size

-0.0224* (-1.976)

-0.0109*** (-3.994)

-0.0293* (-1.776)

Z score

-0.0708*** (-3.148)

-0.0296** (-2.595)

Z score2

0.00988*** (2.834)

0.00418** (2.259)

O score

0.0217** (2.094)

O score2

0.00352* (1.872)

Board size

0.0156** (2.680)

0.00628*** (3.850)

0.0122* (1.959)

Outside director ratio

-0.0358 (-0.516)

-0.0411 (-1.296)

0.0380 (0.550)

Staggered dummy

-0.0526** (-2.070)

0.000962 (0.0990)

-0.0460* (-1.700)

CEO ≠ Chair duality

-0.0246 (-1.152)

-0.00592 (-0.982)

0.00484 (0.192)

CEO tenure

0.000391 (0.222)

-0.000520 (-0.955)

-0.000531 (-0.399)

Institutional ownership

-0.0188 (-0.400)

-0.00279 (-0.241)

0.0113 (0.238)

Intercept

0.254*** (3.414)

0.113*** (3.755)

0.187** (2.390)

Observations

117 206 119

R-squared

0.287

0.199

0.187

VIII Total Speculation (reserves)
-0.0159*** (-4.025)
5.70e-05 (0.0298) -0.000900* (-1.726) 0.00571*** (3.146) -0.0341 (-0.822) -0.00427 (-0.492) 0.000444 (0.0622) -0.000853 (-1.544) -0.00108 (-0.0977) 0.115*** (2.964)
202 0.156

37

Table 4
Speculation and Stock Return Volatility This table presents the regression results of lagged changes in speculation on changes in stock return volatility. The dependent variable in all regressions is the annualized weekly standard deviation of returns for the stock price during the year t. Total speculation is the yearly standard deviation of the quarterly residuals from a two-step Heckman regression of hedging on firm characteristics. Firm size is the log of the market value of assets in millions of US$. Market-tobook ratio is the market value of assets divided by the book value of assets. Quick ratio equals [(cash + cash equivalents + receivables) / current liabilities]. Leverage is the ratio of the book value of debt to the book value of preferred stock, common stock and long-term debt. Figures in parentheses denote t-statistics estimated with standard errors adjusted for firm clustering following Petersen (2009) and *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1% levels respectively.

DTotal speculation (production)t-1
DTotal speculation (reserves)t-1
Dfirm size t
Dquick t
Dleverage t
Dmarket to book t Constant Observations R-squared

I II III IV

Changes in stock return volatility

0.203** (2.128)

0.294*** (3.260)

0.638

0.802*

(1.532)

(2.014)

-0.134**

-0.0599*

(-2.240)

(-1.787)

-0.0105**

-0.00677***

(-2.658)

(-2.934)

-0.0285 (-0.249) 0.0830**

0.00825 (0.121) 0.0676***

0.0459*** (4.607) 91 0.026

(2.267) 0.0429***
(4.073)
86 0.207

0.0582*** (6.238) 188 0.021

(3.535) 0.0539***
(5.483)
178 0.127

38

Table 5

Robustness Checks of Selective Hedging as a Function of Firm, Board and Executive

Characteristics using Alternative Speculation Measures

This table presents the regression results of speculation as a function of firm characteristics, board

characteristics, CEO tenure and institutional ownership. For this set of robustness checks,

speculation is measured as the year by year standard deviation of quarterly hedge ratios. These

standard deviations of hedge ratios are the dependent variable in the second step of the Heckman

2-step regressions. The first step models the decision to hedge as a function of firm characteristics.

Firm size is the log of the market value of assets in millions of US$. Z-scores and O-scores are

calculated following Altman (1968) and Ohlson (1980), respectively. Institutional ownership is the

percentage of the firm owned by institutions as reported in proxy statements. Staggered dummy is

equal to one if the board of directors is staggered and zero otherwise. CEO-Chair duality is equal

to one if the CEO is also the chairman of the board and zero otherwise. CEO tenure is the tenure

of chief executive officers at their firms. Outside director ratio is the fraction of outsiders on the

board of directors and board size is the number of directors on the board of directors. Figures in

parentheses denote t-statistics estimated with standard errors adjusted for firm clustering following

Petersen (2009) and *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1% levels respectively.

I II IIII IV

Total

Total

Total

Total

Speculation

Speculation Speculation

Speculation

(production)

(reserves)

(production)

(reserves)

Firm size
Z score Z score2
O score O score2 Board size Outside director ratio Staggered dummy CEO ≠ Chair duality CEO tenure Institutional ownership Inverse Mills ratio Intercept Observations R-squared

-0.0157 (-1.607) -0.0416*** (-2.905) 0.00525*** (2.636)
0.0047 (1.269) 0.0803 (1.429) -0.0433** (-2.302) -0.00365 (-0.209) -0.000721 (-0.495) -0.0793** (-1.995) 0.00438 (0.133) 0.160** (2.272)
121 0.2219

-0.00749*** (-2.638)
-0.0323*** (-2.758)
0.00424** (2.241)
0.00575*** (3.04) -0.0381 (-1.160)
-0.00153 (-0.144) -0.00326 (-0.518) -0.000536 (-0.821) -0.00844 (-0.662) 0.0311 (1.219) 0.0905*** (3.298)
206 0.1986

-0.0283*** (-3.020)
0.0191* (1.977) 0.00202 (1.100) 0.00817* (1.948) 0.0194 (0.393) -0.0155 (-1.030) -0.00103 (-0.0701) -0.00134* (-1.697) 0.00265 (0.112) -0.0206 (-0.635) 0.219*** (3.544)
119 0.294

-0.0154*** (-3.563)
0.000252 (0.148) -0.000904* (-1.755) 0.00586*** (2.957) -0.0321 (-0.775) -0.00577 (-0.777) 0.00101 (0.146) -0.000874* (-1.748) -0.00289 (-0.273) 0.00700 (0.293) 0.107*** (3.044)
202 0.151

39

Table 6
Robustness Checks Using Alternate Measures of Information Advantage
This table presents regression results of speculation as a function of firm characteristics, board characteristics, CEO tenure and institutional ownership, where firm size is replaced by production and reserves as alternate measures of a firm's information advantage. Total speculation is the yearly standard deviation of the quarterly residuals from a two-step Heckman regression of hedging on firm characteristics. Production is the amount of gold produced by the firm during the year (in thousands of ounces) and reserves are proven reserves of gold (in thousands of ounces) owned by the firm at the end of the fiscal year. Z-scores and O-scores are calculated following Altman (1968) and Ohlson (1980), respectively. Institutional ownership is the percentage of the firm owned by institutions as reported in proxy statements. Staggered dummy is equal to one if the board of directors is staggered and zero otherwise. CEO-Chair duality is equal to one if the CEO is also the chairman of the board and zero otherwise. CEO tenure is the tenure of chief executive officers at their firms. Outside director ratio is the fraction of outsiders on the board of directors and board size is the number of directors on the board of directors. Figures in parentheses denote t-statistics estimated with standard errors adjusted for firm clustering following Petersen (2009) and *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1% levels respectively.

I II

III IV

Total Speculation (production)

Total Speculation (reserves)

Panel A: Using Altman's Z-score as bankruptcy probability measure

Gold production

-2.56e-05** (-2.218)

-1.28e-05** (-2.660)

Gold reserves

-1.12e-06 (-1.242)

-1.19e-06*** (-3.203)

Z score

-0.0858*** (-3.247)

-0.0869*** (-3.267)

-0.0354*** (-3.045)

-0.0353*** (-3.053)

Z score2 Board size Outside director ratio Staggered dummy CEO ≠ Chair duality CEO tenure Institutional ownership Intercept

0.0121*** (2.991) 0.0142** (2.482) -0.0359 (-0.547) -0.0472* (-1.728) -0.0257 (-1.111)
-0.000197 (-0.0977) -0.0253 (-0.597) 0.162**
(2.530)

0.0121*** (2.987) 0.0123** (2.048) -0.0541 (-0.788) -0.0439 (-1.606) -0.0293 (-1.305) -3.76e-05 (-0.0186) -0.0187 (-0.450) 0.187***
(2.722)

0.00503*** (2.711)
0.00452*** (2.897) -0.0427 (-1.103) 0.000577 (0.0560) -0.00574 (-0.743)
-0.000808 (-1.244) -0.00782 (-0.598) 0.0811**
(2.331)

0.00502*** (2.713)
0.00547*** (3.472) -0.0488 (-1.275) 0.000934 (0.0950) -0.00404 (-0.525)
-0.000903 (-1.413) -0.00565 (-0.450) 0.0782**
(2.326)

Observations R-squared

116 0.268

116 0.259

206 0.161

206 0.176

40

Table 6 -- Continued

I II III IV

Total Speculation (production)

Total Speculation (reserves)

Panel B: Using Ohlson's O-score as bankruptcy probability measure

Gold production

-1.84e-05 (-1.119)

-1.15e-05* (-1.759)

Gold reserves

-5.40e-07 (-0.390)

-1.14e-06** (-2.302)

O score

0.0253** (2.307)

0.0254** (2.326)

0.00157 (0.861)

0.00165 (0.909)

O score2

0.00362 (1.500)

0.00327 (1.378)

-0.000482 (-1.048)

-0.000492 (-1.050)

Board size

0.00669 (1.201)

0.00488 (0.796)

0.00163 (1.070)

0.00271* (1.681)

Outside director ratio

0.0245 (0.328)

0.00436 (0.0592)

-0.0199 (-0.454)

-0.0267 (-0.633)

Staggered dummy

-0.0408 (-1.408)

-0.0383 (-1.299)

-0.00575 (-0.626)

-0.00589 (-0.659)

CEO ≠ Chair duality

0.00565 (0.211)

0.00288 (0.107)

0.00396 (0.471)

0.00586 (0.682)

CEO tenure

-0.00107 (-0.697)

-0.000952 (-0.607)

-0.000940 (-1.506)

-0.00104 (-1.636)

Institutional ownership

-0.000500 (-0.0137)

0.00177 (0.0477)

-0.00943 (-0.704)

-0.00786 (-0.609)

Intercept

0.0822 (1.137)

0.108 (1.446)

0.0504 (1.272)

0.0479 (1.274)

Observations

112 112 190 190

R-squared

0.120

0.110

0.046

0.063

41

Table 7

Selective Hedging and CEO Compensation Characteristics This table presents the regression results of speculation as a function of CEO compensation characteristics. Total speculation is the yearly standard deviation of the quarterly residuals from a two-step Heckman regression of hedging on firm characteristics. Firm size is the log of the market value of assets in millions of US$. CEO compensation deltas and vegas are calculated as in Core and Guay (2002). Figures in parentheses denote t-statistics estimated with standard errors adjusted for firm clustering following Petersen (2009) and *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1% levels respectively.

I II III IV

Total Speculation (production)

Total Speculation (reserves)

Panel A: Using Altman's Z-score as bankruptcy probability measure

Firm size

-0.0301** (-2.088)

0.0135 (1.661)

-0.00561** (-2.440)

-0.00324 (-0.869)

Z score

-0.0725*** (-3.396)

-0.0503** (-2.180)

-0.0308*** (-2.779)

-0.0256 (-1.151)

Z score2

0.0105*** (2.989)

0.00653* (1.934)

0.00452** (2.465)

0.00394 (1.059)

Board size

0.0113* (1.931)

-0.00535 (-1.601)

0.00268** (2.234)

0.00216 (1.228)

Outside director ratio

0.0852 (0.787)

-0.00431 (-0.0640)

0.0181 (0.830)

0.0220 (0.604)

Staggered dummy

-0.0492** (-2.045)

0.0154 (0.690)

0.000508 (0.0442)

0.00825 (0.583)

CEO ≠ Chair duality

-0.0225 (-0.801)

-0.00720 (-0.283)

-0.00334 (-0.550)

0.00434 (0.533)

CEO tenure

-0.00132 (-0.830)

-0.000200 (-0.148)

-0.000491 (-0.942)

7.66e-05 (0.155)

Institutional ownership

-0.00784 (-0.187)

-0.0237 (-1.063)

-0.00885 (-0.738)

-0.00678 (-0.600)

Log (delta of CEO compensation)

0.0219 (1.675)

0.00181 (0.797)

Log (vega of CEO compensation)

-0.0104 (-0.856)

-0.000916 (-0.490)

Log (delta of CFO compensation)

0.0286 (1.393)

-0.00368 (-0.859)

Log (vega of CFO compensation)

-0.0305 (-1.492)

0.000778 (0.224)

Intercept

0.134 (1.559)

0.0984 (1.330)

0.0572*** (3.082)

0.0605** (2.165)

Observations

91 46 153 80

R-squared

0.313

0.362

0.209

0.147

42

Table 7 -- Continued

V VI VII VIII

Total Speculation (production) Total Speculation (reserves) Panel B: Using Ohlson's O-score as bankruptcy probability measure

Firm size

-0.0341 (-1.622)

0.0128 (1.016)

-0.00968** (-2.206)

-0.00669 (-1.083)

O score

0.0184 (1.511)

0.0385*** (8.455)

0.00125 (0.619)

0.00131 (0.712)

O score2

0.00438 (1.625)

-0.00649*** (-4.880)

-9.54e-05 (-0.205)

0.000206 (0.583)

Board size

0.00882 (1.195)

-0.00400 (-1.300)

0.00260 (1.445)

0.00113 (0.641)

Outside director ratio Staggered dummy

0.107
(0.834) -0.0448 (-1.545)

-0.0221
(-0.309) 0.0284 (1.272)

0.0305
(0.818) -0.00260 (-0.265)

0.0693
(1.146) 0.00341 (0.337)

CEO ≠ Chair duality

0.00592 (0.176)

-0.00246 (-0.198)

0.00251 (0.341)

0.00667 (0.945)

CEO tenure

-0.000263 (-0.174)

0.000327 (0.267)

-0.000128 (-0.218)

0.000487 (0.608)

Institutional ownership
Log (delta of CEO compensation)

0.00695
(0.172) 0.0121 (0.982)

-0.0381 (-1.532)

-0.00504
(-0.487) -0.000745 (-0.336)

-0.0106 (-0.916)

Log (vega of CEO compensation)

-0.00475 (-0.377)

0.00101 (0.716)

Log (delta of CFO compensation)
Log (vega of CFO compensation)
Intercept
Observations R-squared

0.108 (1.077)
94 0.169

0.0250
(1.288) -0.0312 (-1.403) 0.102 (1.188)
50 0.462

0.0456 (1.371)
153 0.079

-0.00226
(-0.688) 0.000388 (0.134)
0.0172 (0.636)
81 0.093

43

SFB 649 Discussion Paper Series 2012
For a complete list of Discussion Papers published by the SFB 649, please visit http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de.
001 "HMM in dynamic HAC models" by Wolfgang Karl H‰rdle, Ostap Okhrin and Weining Wang, January 2012.
002 "Dynamic Activity Analysis Model Based Win-Win Development Forecasting Under the Environmental Regulation in China" by Shiyi Chen and Wolfgang Karl H‰rdle, January 2012.
003 "A Donsker Theorem for LÈvy Measures" by Richard Nickl and Markus Reiﬂ, January 2012.
004 "Computational Statistics (Journal)" by Wolfgang Karl H‰rdle, Yuichi Mori and J¸rgen Symanzik, January 2012.
005 "Implementing quotas in university admissions: An experimental analysis" by Sebastian Braun, Nadja Dwenger, Dorothea K¸bler and Alexander Westkamp, January 2012.
006 "Quantile Regression in Risk Calibration" by Shih-Kang Chao, Wolfgang Karl H‰rdle and Weining Wang, January 2012.
007 "Total Work and Gender: Facts and Possible Explanations" by Michael Burda, Daniel S. Hamermesh and Philippe Weil, February 2012.
008 "Does Basel II Pillar 3 Risk Exposure Data help to Identify Risky Banks?" by Ralf Sabiwalsky, February 2012.
009 "Comparability Effects of Mandatory IFRS Adoption" by Stefano Cascino and Joachim Gassen, February 2012.
010 "Fair Value Reclassifications of Financial Assets during the Financial Crisis" by Jannis Bischof, Ulf Br¸ggemann and Holger Daske, February 2012.
011 "Intended and unintended consequences of mandatory IFRS adoption: A review of extant evidence and suggestions for future research" by Ulf Br¸ggemann, Jˆrg-Markus Hitz and Thorsten Sellhorn, February 2012.
012 "Confidence sets in nonparametric calibration of exponential LÈvy models" by Jakob Sˆhl, February 2012.
013 "The Polarization of Employment in German Local Labor Markets" by Charlotte Senftleben and Hanna Wielandt, February 2012.
014 "On the Dark Side of the Market: Identifying and Analyzing Hidden Order Placements" by Nikolaus Hautsch and Ruihong Huang, February 2012.
015 "Existence and Uniqueness of Perturbation Solutions to DSGE Models" by Hong Lan and Alexander Meyer-Gohde, February 2012.
016 "Nonparametric adaptive estimation of linear functionals for low frequency observed LÈvy processes" by Johanna Kappus, February 2012.
017 "Option calibration of exponential LÈvy models: Implementation and empirical results" by Jakob Sˆhl und Mathias Trabs, February 2012.
018 "Managerial Overconfidence and Corporate Risk Management" by Tim R. Adam, Chitru S. Fernando and Evgenia Golubeva, February 2012.
019 "Why Do Firms Engage in Selective Hedging?" by Tim R. Adam, Chitru S. Fernando and Jesus M. Salas, February 2012.
SFB 649, Spandauer Straﬂe 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

