BERLIN

SFB 6 4 9 E C O N O M I C R I S K

SFB 649 Discussion Paper 2012-053
Financial Network Systemic Risk Contributions
Nikolaus Hautsch* Julia Schaumburg* Melanie Schienle*
* Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".
http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de ISSN 1860-5664
SFB 649, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin

Financial Network Systemic Risk Contributions 
Nikolaus Hautsch Julia Schaumburg Melanie Schienle
August 27, 2012
Abstract
We propose the realized systemic risk beta as a measure for financial companies' contribution to systemic risk given network interdependence between firms' tail risk exposures. Conditional on statistically pre-identified network spillover effects and market and balance sheet information, we define the realized systemic risk beta as the total time-varying marginal effect of a firm's Value-at-risk (VaR) on the system's VaR. Suitable statistical inference reveals a multitude of relevant risk spillover channels and determines companies' systemic importance in the U.S. financial system. Our approach can be used to monitor companies' systemic importance allowing for a transparent macroprudential regulation.
Keywords: Systemic risk contribution, systemic risk network, Value at Risk, network topology, two-step quantile regression, time-varying parameters JEL classification: G01, G18, G32, G38, C21, C51, C63
 This paper replaces former working paper versions with title "Quantifying Time-Varying Marginal Systemic Risk Contributions". Nikolaus Hautsch, Center for Applied Statistics and Economics (CASE), Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin and Center for Financial Studies, Frankfurt, email: nikolaus.hautsch@wiwi.hu-berlin.de. Julia Schaumburg, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, email: julia.schaumburg@wiwi.hu-berlin.de. Melanie Schienle, CASE and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, email: melanie.schienle@wiwi.hu-berlin.de. We thank Tobias Adrian, Frank Betz, Christian Brownlees, Markus Brunnermeier, Jon Danielsson, Robert Engle, Tony Hall, Simone Manganelli, Robin Lumsdaine, Tuomas Peltonen as well as participants of the annual meeting of the Society for Financial Econometrics (SoFiE) in Chicago, the 2011 annual European Meeting of the Econometric Society in Oslo, the 2011 Humboldt-Copenhagen Conference in Copenhagen, the 2012 Financial Econometrics Conference in Toulouse and the European Central Bank high-level conference on "Financial Stability: Methodological Advances and Policy Issues", Frankfurt, June 2012. Research support by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft via the Collaborative Research Center 649 "Economic Risk" is gratefully acknowledged.
1

The financial crisis 2007-2009 has shown that cross-sectional dependencies between assets and credit exposures can cause even small risks of individual banks to cascade and build up to a substantial threat for the stability of an entire financial system.1 Under certain economic conditions, company-specific risk cannot be appropriately assessed in isolation without accounting for potential risk spillover effects from other firms. In fact, it is not just its size and idiosyncratic risk but also its interconnectedness with other firms which determines a company's systemic relevance i.e., its potential to significantly increase the risk of failure of the entire system ­ which we denote as systemic risk.2 While there is a broad consensus that any prudential regulatory policy should account for the consequences of network interdependencies in the financial system, in practice, however, any attempt of a transparent implementation must fail, as long as suitable empirical measures for firms' individual risk, risk spillovers and systemic relevance are not available. In particular, it is unclear how to quantify individual risk exposures and systemic risk contributions in an appropriate but still parsimonious and empirically tractable way for a prevailing underlying network structure. And there is an apparent need for respective empirically feasible and forward-looking measures which only rely on available data of publicly disclosed balance sheet and market information but still account for the complexity of the financial system.
A general empirical assessment of systemic relevance cannot build on the vast theoretical literature of financial network models and financial contagion, since these results typically require detailed information on intra-bank asset and liability exposures (see, e.g., Allen and Gale, 2000, Freixas, Parigi, and Rochet, 2000, and Leitner, 2005). Such data is generally not publicly disclosed and even regulators can only collect partial information on some sources of inter-bank linkages. Available empirical studies linked to this literature can therefore only partially contribute to a full picture of companies' systemic relevance as they focus on particular parts of specific markets at a particular time under particular financial conditions (see, e.g., Upper and Worms, 2004, and Furfine, 2003, for
1For a thorough description of the financial crisis, see, e.g., Brunnermeier (2009). 2Bernanke (2009) and Rajan (2009) stress the danger induced by institutions which are "too interconnected to fail" or "too systemic to fail" in contrast to the insufficient focus on firms which are simply "too big too fail".
2

Germany and the U.S., respectively).3 Furthermore, assessing risk interconnections on the basis of multivariate failure probability distributions has proven to be statistically complicated without using restrictive assumptions driving the results (see, e.g., Boss, Elsinger, Summer, and Thurner, 2004, or Zhou, 2009, and references therein). Finally, for regulators it is often unclear, how complex structures ultimately translate into dynamic and predictable measures of systemic relevance.
The objective of this paper is to develop an easily and widely applicable measure of a firm's systemic relevance, explicitly accounting for the company's interconnectedness within the financial sector. We assess companies' risk of financial distress on the basis of share price information which directly incorporates market perceptions of a firm's prospects, publicly accessible market data as well as balance sheet data. As for risk interconnectedness only dependencies in extreme tails of asset return distributions matter, we base our measure on extreme conditional quantiles of corresponding return distributions quantifying the risk of distress of individual companies and the entire system respectively. In this sense, our setting builds on the concept of conditional Value-at-Risk (VaR), which is a popular and widely accepted measure for tail risk.4 For each firm, we identify its so-called relevant (tail) risk drivers as the minimal set of macroeconomic fundamentals, firm-specific characteristics and risk spillovers from competitors and other companies driving the company's VaR. Detecting with whom and how strongly any institution is connected allows us to construct a tail risk network of the financial system. A company's contribution to systemic risk is then defined as the induced total effect of an increase in its individual tail risk on the VaR of the entire system, conditional on the firm's position within the financial network as well as overall market conditions. Furthermore, by assessing a company's conditional VaR in dependence of respective tail risk drivers, we obtain a reliable measure of a company's idiosyncratic risk in the presence of network spillovers.
3See also Cocco, Gomes, and Martins (2009) for parts of the financial sector in Portugal, Elsinger, Lehar, and Summer (2006) for Austria, and Degryse and Nguyen (2007) for Belgium. A rare exception is the unique data set for India with full information on the intra-banking market studied in Iyer and Peydrió (2011).
4Note that the VaR is a coherent risk measure in realistic market settings, i.e., in cases of return distributions with tails decaying faster than those of the Cauchy distribution, see Garcia, Renault, and Tsafack (2007). In principle, our methodology could also be adapted to other tail risk measures such as, e.g., expected shortfall. Such a setting, however, would involve additional estimation steps and complications, probably inducing an overall loss of accuracy in results given the limited amount of available data.
3

The underlying statistical setting is a two-stage quantile regression approach: In the first step, firm-specific VaRs are estimated as functions of firm characteristics, macroeconomic state variables as well as tail risk spillovers of other banks which are captured by loss exceedances. Hereby, the major challenge is to shrink the high-dimensional set of possible cross-linkages between all financial firms to a feasible number of relevant risk connections. We address this issue statistically as a model selection problem in individual institution's VaR specifications which we solve in a pre-step. In particular, we make use of novel Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO) techniques (see Belloni and Chernozhukov, 2011) which allows us to identify the relevant tail risk drivers for each company in a fully automatic way. The resulting identified risk interconnections are best represented in terms of a network graph as illustrated in Figure 1 (and discussed in more detail in the remainder of the paper) for the system of the 57 largest U.S. financial companies. In the second step, for measuring a firm's systemic impact, we individually regress the VaR of a value-weighted index of the financial sector on the firm's estimated VaR while controlling for the pre-identified company-specific risk drivers as well as macroeconomic state variables. We derive standard errors which explicitly account for estimation errors resulting from the pre-estimation of regressors in quantile relations. As the generally available sample sizes of balance sheet and macroeconomic information make the use of large-sample inference questionable, we provide (non-standard) bootstrap methods to construct finite-sample-based parameter tests.
We determine a company's systemic risk contribution as the marginal effect of its individual VaR on the VaR of the system. In analogy to an (inverted) asset pricing relationship in quantiles we call the measure systemic risk beta. It corresponds to the system's marginal risk exposure due to changes in the tail of a firm's loss distribution. For comparing the systemic relevance of companies across the system, however, it is necessary to compute the induced total increase in systemic risk. We therefore rank companies according to their "realized" systemic risk beta corresponding to the product of a company's systemic risk beta and its VaR. The systemic risk beta - and therefore also its realized version - is modeled as a function of firm-specific characteristics, such as leverage, maturity mismatch and size. Accordingly, a firm's tail risk effect on the system can vary with
4

Figure 1: Risk network of the U.S. financial system schematically highlighting key companies
in the system in 2000-2008. Details on all other firms in the system only appearing as unlabeled shaded nodes will be provided later in the paper. Depositories are marked in red, broker dealers in green, insurance companies in black, others in blue. An arrow pointing from firm j to firm i reflects an impact of extreme returns of j on the VaR of i (V aRi) which is identified as being relevant employing statistical selection techniques presented in the remainder of the paper. VaRs are measured in terms of 5%-quantiles of the return distribution. The effect of j on i is measured in terms of the impact of an increase of the return Xj on V aRi given Xi is below its 10% quantile, i.e., i's so-called loss exceedance. The size of the respective increase in V aRj given a 1% increase of the loss exceedance of i is reflected by the thickness of the respective arrowhead where we distinguish between three categories: thin arrowheads display an increase up to 0.4, medium size of 0.4-0.8, and thick arrowheads of greater than 0.8. The thickness of the line of the arrow is chosen along the same categories. If arrows point in both directions, the thickness of the line corresponds to the bigger one of the two effects. The graph is constructed such that the total length of all arrows in the system is minimized. Accordingly, more interconnected firms are located in the center.
its economic conditions and/or its balance sheet structure changing its marginal systemic
importance even though its individual risk level might be identical at different time points.
Our empirical results reveal a high degree of tail risk interconnectedness among U.S. fi-
nancial institutions. In particular, we find that these network risk interconnection effects
are the dominant risk drivers in individual risk. The detected channels of potential risk
spillovers contain fundamental information for supervision authorities but also for com-
pany risk managers. Based on the topology of the systemic risk network, we can cate-
gorize firms into three broad groups according to their type and extent of connectedness
with other companies: main risk transmitters, risk recipients and companies which both
5

Realized sysemic risk beta 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0

1
q3

Bank of America AXP

1q
2q
3q 4q 5
21

q5

JP Morgan

15
q 16
17

Charles Schwab Citigroup Morgan Stanley

03/2007

Time

06/2008

Figure 2: Systemic relevance of five exemplary firms in the U.S. financial system at two time
points before and at the height of the financial crisis, 2008. Systemic relevance is measured in "systemic risk betas" quantifying the marginal increase of the VaR of the system given an increase in a bank's VaR while controlling for the bank's (pre-identified) risk drivers. All VaRs are computed at the 5% level and are by definition positive. We depict respective "realized" versions of the systemic risk beta corresponding to the product of a risk beta and the corresponding VaR representing a company's total effect on systemic risk. Connecting lines are just added to graphically highlight changes between the two time points but do not mark real evolutions. The size of the elements in the graph reflects the size of the VaR of the respective company at each of the two time points. We use the following scale: the element is k·standard size with k = 1 for V aR  0.05, k = 1.5 for V aR  (0.05, 0.1], k = 2 for V aR  (0.1, 0.15], k = 3 for V aR  (0.2, 0.25] and k = 5.5 for V aR  (0.65, 0.7]. Attached numbers inside the figure mark the position of the respective company in an overall ranking of the 57 largest U.S. financial companies for each of the two time points.

receive and transmit tail risk. From a regulatory point of view, the second group of pure risk recipients has the least systemic impact. Monitoring their condition, however, might still convey important accumulated information on potentially hidden problems in those companies which act as their risk drivers. In any case, the internal risk management of these companies should account for the possible threat induced by the large degree of dependence on others. In particular, assessing their full risk exposure requires network augmented risk measures such as, e.g., our proposed VaR specifications depending on (pre-selected) network risk drivers. The highest attention of supervision authorities should be attracted by firms which mainly act as risk drivers or are highly interconnected risk transmitters in the system. These are particularly firms in the center of the network which appear as "too interconnected to fail", but also large risk producers at the boundary

6

which are linked to only a few but heavily connected risk transmitters. While the systemic risk network yields qualitative information on risk channels and roles of companies within the financial system, estimates of systemic risk betas allow to quantify the resulting individual systemic relevance and thus complement the full picture. Ranking companies based on (realized) systemic risk betas shows that large depositories are particularly risky. After controlling for all relevant network effects, they have the overall strongest impact on systemic risk and should be regulated accordingly. Confirming general intuition, time evolutions of (realized) systemic risk betas indicate that most companies' systemic risk contribution sharply increases during the 2007/08 financial crisis. These effects are particularly pronounced for firms, which indeed got into financial distress during the crisis and are (ex post) identified as being clearly systemically risky by our approach. Figure 2 exemplarily illustrates the evolutions of their marginal systemic contributions ­ as reflected by systemic risk betas ­ as well as their exposure to idiosyncratic tail risk ­ as quantified by their VaR. A detailed pre-crisis case study confirms the validity of our methodology since firms such as, e.g., Lehman Brothers are ex-ante identified as being highly systemically relevant. It is well-known that their subsequent failure has indeed had a huge impact on the stability of the entire financial system. Likewise, the extensive bail-outs of American International Group (AIG), Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae can be justified given their high systemic risk betas and high interconnectedness by the end of 2007.
Our paper relates to several strands of recent empirical literature on systemic risk contributions. Closest to our work is White, Kim, and Manganelli (2010) who propose a bivariate vector-autoregressive system of each company's VaR and the system VaR. They capture time variations in tail risk in a pure time series setting which however does not account for mutual dependencies and network effects. In contrast, our set-up models tail risk in dependence of economic state variables and network spillovers which automatically account for periods of turbulence when predicting the systemic relevance. Building on VaR, Adrian and Brunnermeier (2011) were the first to construct a systemic risk measure, called CoV aR, with balance sheet characteristics driving individual risk exposures. Note that CoVaR is conceptionally different two our two-step quantile approach and can by definition only vary through the channel of individual risk of the considered company. Moreover, network interconnections are not addressed which we identify as crucial
7

for the performance of the model. Our work also complements papers which measure a company's systemic relevance by focusing on the size of potential bail-out costs, such as Acharya, Pedersen, Philippon, and Richardson (2010) and Brownlees and Engle (2011). Such approaches cannot detect spillover effects driven by the topology of the risk network and might under-estimate the systemic importance of small but very interconnected companies. Moreover, while Brownlees and Engle (2011) study the situation of an individual firm given that the system is under distress, we investigate the reverse relation and measure the effect on the system given an individual firm is in financial trouble. Both approaches are justified as they take complementary perspectives and measure different dimensions of systemic risk. In the same way, we also complement macroeconomic approaches taking a more aggregated view as, e.g., the literature on systemic risk indicators (e.g., Segoviano and Goodhart, 2009, Giesecke and Kim, 2011) or papers on early warning signals (e.g., Schwaab, Koopman, and Lucas, 2011, and Koopman, Lucas, and Schwaab, 2011).
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 1, we briefly explain the modeling idea and describe the underlying data. Section 2 presents the model and estimation procedure for individual companies' VaRs, before discussing results on the financial network structure. Section 3 gives the second stage, the system VaR model, including estimation procedure, inference method and empirical results. In Section 4, we robustify and validate our results by presenting a case study of five large financial institutions that were affected by the financial crisis, and try to predict their distress and systemic relevance using only pre-crisis data. Section 5 concludes.
1 Measuring Systemic Relevance in a Network
1.1 Framework
Assessing and predicting dependence between systemic risk and firm-specific risk requires modeling regression relations in the (left) tails of respective asset return distributions, rather than in the center. This is in sharp contrast to a standard correlation analysis in (conditional) means which cannot quantify spillovers in tail situations of financial dis-
8

tress, and also goes beyond simple descriptive correlations between tails. Tail correlations do not allow detecting causal dependencies between tails and do not permit forecasting systemic risk contributions. We consider a stress-test-type scenario for assessing how changes in individual company-specific risk affect the risk of failure of the entire system given underlying network dependencies between institutions and market externalities at the respective point in time. Therefore, our model does not feature a general equilibrium framework, but is exclusively designed to provide a practically feasible and reliable measure of a company's marginal contribution to systemic risk in the presence of risk spillovers from other companies. These underlying network linkages between tail risks of firms in the system must be identified in a first step.
Defining the company-specific asset return as Xti, we measure the tail risk of a company as its conditional Value-at-Risk (VaR), V aRpi ,t, given a set of company-specific tail risk drivers Wt(i) containing network influences from other institutions in the system, i.e.,

Pr(-Xti  V aRpi ,t|Wt(i)) = Pr(Xti  Qpi ,t|Wt(i)) = p

(1)

with V aRpi ,t = V aRpi ,t(Wt(i)) = -Qip,t denoting the (negative) conditional p-quantile of Xti.5 Likewise, system risk, V aRps,t, is measured as the conditional VaR of the system return Xts obtained as the value-weighted average return of the set of all major financial companies.6 To measure the systemic impact of company i, the system VaR is modeled in dependence of V aRpi ,t and additional control variables Vt, i.e., V aRps,t = V aRps,t(V aRpi ,t, Vt) = -Qps,t. Then, we define the systemic risk beta as the marginal effect of firm i's tail risk on the system tail risk given by

V

aRps,t(Vt, V aRqi ,t) V aRqi ,t

=

ps,|qi .

(2)

We classify the systemic relevance of institutions according to the statistical significance of ps,|qi and the size of their total effect ps,|qi V aRqi,t. We define the latter as a firm's realized
systemic risk contribution raising with the system's marginal exposure to the company's
5Defining VaR as the negative p-quantile ensures that the Value-at-Risk is positive and is interpreted as a loss position.
6For details, see Section 1.2.

9

tail risk (measured by ps,|qi ) and the firm's V aRqi,t. Changes in systemic relevance over time, however, cannot only occur through V aRqi,t but also through the systemic risk beta ps,|qi which we allow to vary in firm-specific characteristics (see Section 3).7 Note that this is conceptionally different to CoVaR of Adrian and Brunnermeier (2011).
As the VaR is not observable and has to be estimated, a major challenge is to select appropriate significant conditioning variables Wt(i) yielding a flexible but still parsimonious model specification. We determine the relevant i-specific tail risk drivers out of a large set of potential regressors Wt containing lagged macroeconomic state variables Mt-1, lagged firm-specific characteristics Cti-1, the i-specific lagged return Xti-1, and influences of all other companies apart from i, E-t i = (Etj)j=i, by a statistical selection technique as discussed in the remainder of the paper. We find that these intra-system influences are best captured via contemporaneous loss exceedances, where the loss exceedance of a firm j is defined as Etj = Xtj1(Xtj  Q^0j.1) and Q^0.1 is the unconditional 10% sample quantile of Xj. Hence, company j only affects the VaR of company i if the former is under pressure. Since Et-i are return realizations and V aRti is a future predicted quantity, this specification furthermore circumvents simultaneity issues. A model for V aRti based on economic state variables as well as loss exceedances by construction automatically adjusts and prevails in distress scenarios under shocks in externalities. This is a clear advantage compared to pure time series approaches (cp. e.g. White, Kim, and Manganelli, 2010, and Brownlees and Engle, 2010).
The selection step allows identifying which (and how strongly) loss exceedances of other companies influence V aRpi ,t and is crucial for accounting for network dependencies between companies. As demonstrated in the sequel of the paper, the latter are crucial for appropriately explaining individual tail risks. Moreover, identifying cross-firm dependencies for each company i is not only essential for appropriately capturing firm-specific VaRs in a first step but is also crucial for selecting necessary control variables in the estimation of ps,|qi in the second step. In particular, for an unbiased estimate of ps,|qi , it is necessary to control for any tail risk drivers influencing both V aRps,t and V aRqi . Accordingly, Vt must contain macroeconomic state variables as well as the tail risks (represented
7For ease of illustration, here we skip the time index in ps,|qi .
10

by the VaRs) of all companies which are identified to influence company i. Ignoring these spillover effects would lead to a biased measure of systemic risk contribution.
The identified risk connections between all firms constitute a systemic risk network. The latter is not only a prerequisite for the quantification of marginal systemic risk contributions but contains additional valuable regulatory information on potential risk channels and specific roles of companies as risk transmitters and/or recipients. Accordingly, the following analysis consists of two steps where in the first step firm-specific VaRs and network effects are quantified (Section 2) before in the second step, systemic risk betas are estimated while controlling for the (pre-)identified cross-company dependencies (Section 3).
1.2 Data
Our analysis focuses on publicly traded U.S. financial institutions. The list of included companies in Table 1 (see Appendix B) comprises depositories, broker dealers, insurance companies and Others.8 To assess a firm's systemic relevance, we use publicly available market and balance sheet data. Such data constitutes a solid basis for transparent regulation since timely access on detailed information of connections between firms' assets and obligations, is very difficult and expensive to obtain ­ even for central banks.
Daily equity prices are obtained from Datastream and are converted to weekly log returns. To account for the general state of the economy, we use weekly observations of seven lagged macroeconomic variables M t-1 as suggested and used by Adrian and Brunnermeier (2011) (abbreviations as used in the remainder of the paper are given in brackets): the implied volatility index, VIX, as computed by the Chicago Board Options Exchange (vix), a short term "liquidity spread", computed as the difference of the 3month collateral repo rate (available on Bloomberg) and the 3-month Treasury bill rate from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (repo), the change in the 3-month Treasury bill rate (yield3m) and the change in the slope of the yield curve, corresponding to the spread between the 10-year and 3-month Treasury bill rate (term). Moreover, we utilize
8Companies are distinguished according to their two-digit SIC codes, following the categorization in Acharya, Pedersen, Philippon, and Richardson (2010).
11

the change in the credit spread between BAA rated bonds and the Treasury bill rate (both at 10 year maturity) (credit), the weekly equity market return from CRSP (marketret) and the one-year cumulative real estate sector return, computed as the value-weighted average of real estate companies available in the CRSP data base (housing).
Moreover, to capture characteristics of individual institutions predicting a bank's propensity to become financially distressed, Cit-1, we follow Adrian and Brunnermeier (2011) and use (i) leverage, calculated as the value of total assets divided by total equity (in book values) (LEV), (ii) maturity mismatch, measuring short-term refinancing risk, calculated as short term debt net of cash divided by the total liabilities (MMM), (iii) the market-tobook value, defined as the ratio of the market value to the book value of total equity (BM), (iv) market capitalization, defined by the logarithm of market valued total assets (SIZE) and (v) the equity return volatility, computed from daily equity return data (VOL). The system return is chosen as the return on the financial sector index provided by Datastream. It is computed as the value-weighted average of prices of 190 U.S. financial institutions.
As balance sheets are available only on a quarterly basis, we interpolate the quarterly data to a daily level using cubic splines, and then aggregate them back to calendar weeks. We focus on 57 financial institutions existing through the period from beginning of 2000 to end of 2008, resulting into 467 weekly observations on individual returns. This restriction has the drawback of excluding companies which defaulted during the financial crisis. Therefore, to address this issue and to validate and robustify our approach, we re-estimate the model over a sub-period ending before the financial crisis and including, among others, the investment banks Lehman Brothers and Merrill Lynch that were massively affected by the crisis.
12

2 A Tail Risk Network

2.1 Measuring Firm-Specific Tail Risks

2.1.1 Identification of Tail Risk Drivers

Specifying the VaR of firm i at time point t = 1, . . . , T as a linear function of the i-specific tail risk drivers W(ti),

V aRqi = W(i) qi ,

(3)

yields a linear function in return quantiles

Xti = -W(ti) iq + ti, with Qq(it|W(ti)) = 0.

(4)

If we knew the i-relevant risk drivers W(i) selected out of W, then, estimates qi of qi could be obtained according to standard linear quantile regression (Koenker and Bassett,

1978) by minimizing

1 T

T

q

Xti + Wt(i) iq

t=1

(5)

with loss function q(u) = u(q - I(u < 0)), where the indicator I(·) is 1 for u < 0 and

zero otherwise, and

V

i
aRq,t

=

Wt(i)

i
q

.

(6)

However, the relevant risk drivers W(i) for firm i are unknown and must be determined from W in advance. Model selection is not straightforward in the given setting as tests on the individual significance of single variables do not account for the (possibly high) collinearity between the covariates. Moreover, sequences of joint significance tests have too many possible variations to be easily checked in case of more than 60 variables. Since alternative model selection criteria, like the Bayes Information Criterion (BIC) or the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC), are not available in a quantile setting, we choose the relevant covariates in a data-driven way by employing a statistical shrinkage technique known as the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO). LASSO

13

methods are standard for high-dimensional conditional mean regression problems (see Tibshirani, 1996), and have recently been adapted to quantile regression by Belloni and Chernozhukov (2011). Accordingly, we run an l1-penalized quantile regression and calculate for a fixed individual penalty parameter i,

i1 q = argmini T

T

q

Xti + Wti

+ i

t=1

q(1 - q) T

K

^k|ki | ,

k=1

(7)

with the set of potentially relevant regressors Wt = (Wt,k)Kk=1, componentwise variation

^k2

=

1 T

Tt=1(Wt,k)2 and the loss function q as in (5). The key idea is to select relevant

regressors according to the absolute value of their respective estimated marginal effects

(scaled by the regressor's variation) in the penalized VaR regression (7). Regressors are

eliminated if their shrunken coefficients are sufficiently close to zero. Here, all firms
i
in W with absolute marginal effects | | below a threshold  = 0.0001 are excluded
keeping only the K(i) remaining relevant regressors W(i). Hence, LASSO de-selects

those regressors contributing only little variation. Due to the additional penalty term
i
in (7), all coefficients q are generally downward biased in finite samples. Therefore, we re-estimate the unrestricted model (5) only with the selected relevant regressors W(i) yielding the final estimates iq. This post-LASSO step produces finite sample estimates of coefficients iq which are superior to the original LASSO estimates or plain quantile
regression results without penalization suffering from overidentification problems (see the

original paper by Belloni and Chernozhukov (2011) for consistency of the post LASSO

step).

The selection of relevant risk drivers via LASSO crucially depends on the choice of the company-specific penalty parameter i. The larger i, the more regressors are eliminated. Conversely, in case of i = 0, we are back in the standard quantile regression setting (5) without any de-selection. For each institution, we determine the appropriate penalty level i in a completely data-driven way such that it dominates a relevant measure of noise in the sample criterion function. In particular, we use the supremum norm of a suitably rescaled gradient of the sample criterion function evaluated at the true parameter value as in Belloni and Chernozhukov (2011). In this sense, number and elements of the set

14

of relevant risk drivers are determined only from the data without any restrictive preassumptions. For details on the empirical procedure we refer to Appendix A.2.
Evaluating the goodness of fit of conditional VaR model specifications should take into account how well the model captures the specific percentile of the return distribution but also how well the model predicts size and frequency of losses. The latter issue cannot be captured, e.g., by quantile-based modifications of the conventional R2. We therefore consider a VaR specification as inadequate if it either fails producing the correct empirical level of VaR exceedances but also if the sequence of exceedances is not independently and identically distributed over the considered time period. This proceeding ensures that VaR violations today do not contain information about VaR violations in the future and both occur according to the same distribution. This is formally tested using a likelihood ratio (LR) version of the dynamic quantile (DQ) test developed in Engle and Manganelli (2004) and described in detail in Appendix A.3. Berkowitz, Christoffersen, and Pelletier (2009) show that this likelihood ratio (LR) test has superior size and power properties compared to competing conditional VaR backtesting methods which dominate plain unconditional level tests (as e.g. Kupiec (1995)).
2.1.2 Empirical Evidence
We estimate VaR specifications with q=0.05 for all companies employing the LASSO selection procedure described in Section 2.1.1.9 Exemplary V aRi (post-)LASSO regression results for firms in the four industrial sectors depositories, insurances, brokers and others are provided in Table 2.
The main drivers of company-specific VaRs are loss exceedances of other firms. In their presence, macroeconomic variables and firm-specific characteristics often do not have any statistically significant influence and are not selected by the LASSO procedure. In Table 2, only for Torchmark (TMK) and Regions Financial (RF) regressors other than cross-firm links are selected. In contrast, VaR specifications of Goldman Sachs (GS), Morgan Stanley (MS), JP Morgan (JPM) and AIG exclusively contain loss exceedances
9Due to the limited number of observations, we refrain from considering more extreme probabilities.
15

P-Values 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

Makro model

LASSO model

Figure 3: Boxplots of backtesting p-values indicating the in-sample model fit of VaR specifications including macroeconomic regressors only (left) and VaR specifications resulting from the LASSO selection procedure (7) (right).
from other firms. Particularly the connections between close competitors, such as Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley and the influence of mortgage company Freddie Mac (FRE) on AIG correspond are highly plausible and are confirmed by market evidence. The relevance of cross-firm effects is additionally robustified by testing for the joint significance of the individually selected loss exceedances E-t i. This is performed based on a quantile regression version of the F -test of linear hypothesis developed by Koenker and Bassett (1982). We find that the selected tail risk spillovers are highly significant in all but very few cases. See Table 3 for an overview of all cross-effects.
The importance of including other companies' loss exceedances as potential risk drivers for a company i is also illustrated by a simple comparison of the forecast performance of our LASSO-selected specifications to a model of V aRi only using macroeconomic variables as in Adrian and Brunnermeier (2011). According to the employed backtests, specifications allowing for cross-firm dependencies reveal a strong predictive ability and are significantly superior to simplistic models including macroeconomic regressors only. Figure 3 shows the distributions of the backtesting p-values implied by both models. Hence, inter-company linkages do not only add crucial explanatory power in VaR specifications but in fact contain the main information for explaining individual tail risk.
Our results show that the major information about cross-company dependencies in tail risks is primarily contained in contemporaneous loss exceedances E-t i. In contrast, alternative VaR specifications utilizing corresponding returns Xt-j or lagged loss exceedances
16

Et--i1 imply significantly inferior backtest performances with the regressors being mostly not significant in joint F-tests.10 Moreover, linking VaR forecasts and thus predictions of hypothetical losses to already realized loss exceedances allows measuring mutual dependencies between companies without requiring a simultaneous system of equations in conditional quantiles. In particular, observed bi-directional relationships between conditional quantiles and realized loss exceedances of different firms (e.g., between Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley) do not reflect simultaneities as feedbacks are not contemporaneous: For instance, a highly negative (realized) return of company j increases the conditional loss quantile and therefore increases the VaR of firm i. However, a higher conditional VaR of i does not necessarily directly increase the absolute realized loss return of i but just makes it more likely. Avoiding an explicit treatment of simultaneities in quantiles while still addressing network dependencies is an important advantage of our approach.11
2.2 Network Model and Structure
We constitute a tail risk network of the system from individually selected loss exceedances reflecting cross-firm dependencies. Taking all firms as nodes in such a network, there is an influence of firm j on firm i, if Ej is LASSO-selected in (7) as a relevant risk externality of firm i in V aRqi . In particular, if Ej is part of W(i) as its k-th component, then the corresponding coefficient qi,k in qi marks the risk impact of firm j on firm i in the network. If Ej is not selected as relevant risk driver of firm i, there is no arrow from firm j to firm i.
For each company in the system, the network builds on only directly influencing and influenced firms and all other companies directly influencing the influenced firms. In the Bayesian network literature, these constitute a so-called Markov blanket assumed to contain all relevant information for predicting the node's role in the network (see Friedman,
10All F-test results are available upon request and omitted here for sake of brevity. 11Econometrically it is open how to handle such a system in conditional quantiles in general. In contrast to relations in (conditional) means, it is unclear how marginal q-quantiles constitute the respective quantile in the joint distribution under appropriate independence assumptions. Only in lags, restricted to very small dimensions and under strong assumptions, solutions have been obtained via CaViAR type recursions (see White, Kim, and Manganelli (2010)).
17

Geiger, and Goldszmidt, 1997). An overview of the identified tail risk connections between all companies is provided in Table 3 reporting which company's loss exceedance affects which others' VaR and vice versa. We observe that the number of risk connections substantially varies over the cross-section of companies. While some firms such as, e.g. , Morgan Stanley, Bank of America (BAC), American Express (AXP) as well as Bank of New York Mellon (BK), are strongly inter-connected with many other companies, there are institutions, such as Fannie Mae (FNM), AIG (AIG) and a couple of further insurances revealing significantly less cross-firm dependencies. In order to effectively illustrate identified risk connections and directions, we graphically depict the resulting network of companies in Figure 5. The layout and allocation of the network is chosen such that the sum of cross-firm distances are minimized. Consequently, the most connected firms are located in the center of the network while the less involved companies are placed at its boundary.
The resulting network topology reveals different roles of companies within the financial network. We distinguish between three major categories: The first group contains companies with only few incoming arrows but numerous outgoing ones and thus mainly act as risk drivers within the system. These are institutions whose potential failure might affect many others but, conversely, which are themselves relatively unaffected by the distress of other firms. Risk management of such firms can therefore be based mostly on idiosyncratic criteria without accounting too much for influences of the system. For regulatory authorities, however, a close monitoring is important as a failure of such a company can induce substantial systemic risks through multiple channels into the financial network. Our results show that only few firms belong to this category. Examples are State Street Corporation (STT), one of the top ten U.S. banks, Leucadia National Corporation (LUK), a holding company which is, among others, engaged in banking, lending and real estate, and SEI Investments Company (SEIC), a financial services firm providing products and service in asset and investment management. Financial distress of these banks obviously has wide-spread consequences. For instance, State Street reveals spillovers to the financial services companies American Express and Northern Trust (NTRS), the Bank of New York Mellon and Morgan Stanley. Leucadia affects Citigroup (C), one of the biggest banks in the U.S., and Freddie Mac, one of the two largest U.S. mortgage companies.
18

Finally, SEI Investments has links to various big institutions, such as Bank of America, American Express, Morgan Stanley and the online broker TD Ameritrade (AMTD).
The second group contains companies which mainly are risk takers within the system. These companies are not necessarily systemically risky but might severely suffer from distress of others and should account for such spillovers in their internal risk management. According to Table 3 and Figure 5 these firms are primarily insurance companies. Examples are Cincinnati Financial Corporation (CINF), a company for property and casualty insurance, Humana Incorporation (HUM) managing health insurances or Progressive Corporation Ohio (PGR) providing automobile insurance and other property-casualty insurances.
The third group is the largest category within the network. It consists of companies which serve as both risk recipients and risk transmitters which amplify tail risk spillovers by further disseminating risk into new channels. Due to their role as risk distributors such companies are key systemic players and should be supervised accordingly. We further distinguish between strongly and less connected firms. The first subgroup is the most difficult but most important to regulate tightly. Examples are Goldman Sachs, Citigroup, Morgan Stanley, AON Corporation (AON), Bank of America, American Express, Freddie Mac as well as the insurance company MBIA (MBI), among many others. Bank of America and Citigroup are among the five largest banks in the U.S. and reveal strong connections to various other big institutions, such as Morgan Stanley, JP Morgan, Goldman Sachs, American Express, Regions Financial and AIG. Details on the specific role of Citigroup and Morgan Stanley within the system are highlighted in Figure 6. Morgan Stanley, with strong links to many companies, such as Goldman Sachs, Bank of America and the savings bank Hudson City Bancorporation (HCBK), and the insurance company AON are examples for deeply connected firms located in the center of the network. Likewise, Freddie Mac is strongly involved and was particularly affected by the 2008 credit crunch in the mortgage sector. Accordingly, also MBIA realized severe losses during the financial crisis due to investments in mortgage backed securities. The second subgroup might be technically easier to monitor with companies revealing risk connections with only very few other firms. Still, supervision is not less important
19

than for the first subgroup. Examples are Fannie Mae and AIG. Fannie Mae reveals significant bilateral risk connections to its main competitor Freddie Mac. AIG holds significant positions in mortgage backed securities and as a consequence is closely connected to both Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Probably due to the same reason, we also observe bilateral tail risk dependencies between AIG and MBIA. Even though their number of relevant risk connections within the network is limited, such firms can still have a crucial overall impact on the system. In case of the 2008 financial crisis, the dependence between Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae as well as their interaction with AIG had severe systemic consequences.
Figure 7 reveals that it is not sufficient to focus on sector-specific subnetworks only. Indeed interconnectedness of institutions occurs to a large proportion between industrial sectors. In these circle layout network graphs, companies are grouped according to industries with risk outflows for each group being highlighted. We observe that tail risks of depositories, insurances and others are relatively equally distributed among all other industry groups. Depositories are most strongly connected and also reveal the strongest tail risk links among each other. This is in contrast to the other industries where cross-firm connections within a group are less strong. Moreover, in contrast to other industry categories, the risk outflow of broker dealers is clearly more concentrated. They particularly affect big banks such as Bank of America and Citigroup as well as financial service companies such as American Express or SEI. Only very few direct connections to insurance companies are revealed.
Besides graphical illustration and inflow-outflow categorizations, standard network characteristics can provide a more comprehensive picture of the interconnectedness and the role of each node in the system. In Figure 4 we depict firms' pagerank coefficient (see Brin and Page (1998)) which does not plainly count links but empirically weights their importance in an iterative scheme.12 Confirming the visual impression based on Figure 5, the most connected firms are Lincoln National Corporation, AON, Bank of America,
12The key idea is to assign a weight to each node (i.e., a company in our context) which is increasing with the number of connections to others and the relative importance thereof. The more connected a firm is, the higher its importance and thus the higher the importance of its neighbor. The computation of the pagerank coefficient can be understood as an eigenvalue problem which can solved iteratively. For more details, see Berkhin (2005).
20

TD Ameritrade and Morgan Stanley. The graph confirms our finding above that depositories tend to be slightly stronger involved than the other industry groups. Particularly insurances reflect a separation into a group of highly connected firms, such as Lincoln National Corp., AON and MBI, and a group of companies being less connected, such as AIG, Humana Incorp. , Unum Group (UNM) and Cincinnati Financial Corp.

Page Rank 0.3 0.6 0.9 1.2 1.5 1.8
Page Rank 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5

LNC q

q AON

BAC q

q EV

q CB

MBI q

q TMK q AFL

MS q
TROW q

NTRS q

q STI

q RF

BBT q

MTB q q ZION

q SEIC

WFC q

AXP q

BEN q
FITB q

L q q ALL q PGR q CNA
q WRB

HIG

HUM

UNM

q

GS q

q HNT q

AIG q q

q MMC

q SNV q SCHq WHCBK

q CINF CI
q

ETFC q

q

CMA q

HBAN

C q

BK

q

SLM q

q JPM

PNC q

q PBCT STT
q

NYB q

q MI

LM q AMTD q

q CVH

q FRE
q LUK
UNP q
q FNM

TMK
q

MS
q

UNM
q

q

WCFBCq
q

BEN

q FITZBION q

RF
q

FRE
q
HIG
q
CINF
q

SCHW
q

PNC
q

PGR
q

q

AIGMMC q

q

NYB q

STT

FNM
q

MI
q

q LMqC

BAC
q

AXP
q

JPM
q

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 Standardized Beta

Figure 4: The left figure displays pagerank coefficients based on the estimated tail risk network
computed as in Berkhin (2005) with ordering of institutions according to sectors. On the right, pagerank coefficients are plotted versus realized systemic risk contributions for all companies which are classified as systemically relevant for the years 2000-2008 as in Subsection 3.3. The solid regression line shows only a small correlation between the pagerank coefficent and the realized beta, supported by the respective R2 of 0.0265 of the regression. Colors and acronyms are as in Figure 7 above.

Note that pagerank coefficients such as other network metrics can only assess the local impact and centrality of firms in the network containing relevant but not all information for judging overall systemic relevance. Therefore, a risk network does not allow to fully quantitatively assess the systemic relevance of a financial institution. Nevertheless, the degree of firms' interconnectedness and the specific topology of the network or corresponding sub-networks allows to identify possible risk channels in the system. These interlinkages are central but not comprehensive for macroprudential regulation reflecting the particular role of a firm as risk recipient, transmitter or distributor of tail risk. To explicitly quantify a firm's marginal systemic relevance, we propose the concept of systemic risk betas presented in the following section.

21

3 Quantifying Systemic Risk Contributions

3.1 Measuring Systemic Risk Betas

Besides valuable information on financial network structures, the focus of supervision authorities is on an accurate but parsimonious measure of an institutions' systemic impact. We quantify the latter as the effect of a marginal change in the tail risk of firm i on the tail risk of the system given the underlying network structure of the financial system. In order to obtain unbiased estimates of this specific marginal effect in the VaR regression of the system, however, it is sufficient to additionally only control for firms which are relevant i-specific risk drivers in the network. Conversely, variables unrelated to V aRi do not affect firm i's systemic risk contribution.13 Thus, a fully-fledged structural general equilibrium model is not necessary. Even if correctly specified, an equilibrium setting would be practically infeasible failing to deliver sufficiently precise estimates given the high-dimensionality and interconnectedness of the financial system on the one hand and the limited data availability on the other.
For this reason, we propose estimating systemic risk contributions based on models which are specific for each firm i as they only control for the i-specific risk drivers. Correspondingly, we estimate the firm-i-specific systemic risk beta qs,|pi based on a linear model for the system VaR of the form

V

aRps,t

=

Vt(i)



s p

+

ps,|qi V

aRqi ,t,

(8)

where the vector of regressors V(ti) = (1, Mt-1, VaRq(-,ti)) includes a constant effect, lagged macroeconomic state variables and the VaRs of all companies which are identified as risk drivers for firm i via LASSO in Section 2.
The systemic risk beta ps,|qi = s|i of company i captures the effect of a marginal change in V aRti on V aRts. It can be interpreted in analogy to an inverse asset pricing relationship in quantiles, where bank i's q-th return quantile drives the p-th quantile of the
13See Angrist, Chernozhukov, and Fernández-Val (2006) for a simple Frisch-Waugh-type argument in quantile regressions.

22

system given network-specific effects and firm-specific and macroeconomic state variables.14 Accordingly,

¯ps,|qi := ps,|qi V aRti

(9)

measures the full partial effect of a tail risk increase of bank i on V aRts. We refer to ¯ps,|qi as the realized systemic risk contribution as it is is computed based on market realizations and is useful for real-time crisis monitoring. Moreover, scaling systemic risk betas by the corresponding VaR allows to cross-sectionally compare systemic risk contributions and to rank banks according to their systemic relevance.
During periods of turbulence, not only banks' risk exposures change but also their marginal importance for the system might vary. We therefore allow s|i being timevarying. In particular, time-variation occurs through observable factors Zi characterizing a bank's propensity to get in financial distress. Accordingly, ts|i should be interpreted as a conditional systemic risk beta. Basing s|i on lagged characteristics, makes betas and thus corresponding systemic risk rankings predictable which is important for forward-looking regulation. To limit complexity and computational burden of the model, we assume linearity of ps,|qi,t in firm-specific distress indicators Zit-1,

ps,|qi,t = 0s,|pi ,q + Zit-1 ps|,iq,

(10)

where ps|,iq are the parameters driving the time-varying effects. The case of a constant systemic risk beta is obviously contained as a special case if ps|,iq = 0 and thus 0s,|pi,q = ps,|qi,t = ps,|qi .
We choose Zit = Cti as the firm-specific tail risk drivers since size, leverage, maturity mismatch, book-to-market ratio and volatility might not only affect a bank's VaR, but
also directly drive its marginal systemic relevance. As a consequence, systemic risk con-
tributions of two companies with the same exposure to macroeconomic risk factors and
financial network spillovers may be still different as they depend on their balance sheet
14Note that our stress test scenario only studies the immediate effect of an exogenous risk shock in company i for the system. We do not infer anything about further steps which should then also account for converse effects of increases of system risk causing firm specific risk to raise.

23

structures. The significance of time variation in these quantities can then be statistically tested for (see Subsection 3.3 below).
Due to the linearity of (10) we can thus write the quantile model (8) for V aRps with time-varying ps,|qi,t in the following form

V

aRps,t

=

V(ti)

 sp

+

0s,|pi ,qV

aRqi ,t

+

(V

aRqi ,t

·

Zit-1)



s|i p,q

.

(11)

3.2 Estimation and Inference

If firm specific VaRs were directly observable, the magnitude and significance of i-specific
systemic risk betas could be directly inferred from the linear quantile regression (11) in
analogy to (5) with the VaR defined by (1). However, note that the regressors V aRti and VaRq(-,ti) in V(i) are pre-estimated as they arise from the first-step quantile regressions as
i (-i)
shown in Section 2. Hence, operationalizing (11) with V aRt and VaRq,t as generated
regressors, yields the (second step) quantile regression,

Xts

=

-V(i) t  sp

-

0s,|pi ,qV

i
aRq,t

-

(V

i
aRq,t

·

Zti-1)

sp|,iq

+

ts,

with

Qp(ts|V

i
aRq,t,

(i)
Vt ,

Zti-1)

=

0

.

(12)

With

the

notation

(i)
V,

we

stress

that

some

components

of

V(i)

are

pre-estimated

as

(-i)
VaRq . Then, analogously to the first-step regressions in Section 2, parameter estimates

are obtained via quantile regression minimizing

1T T p
t=1

Xts

+

V(i)t

s p

+

0s,|pi ,qV

i
aRq,t

+

(V

i
aRq,t

·

Zit-1)

sp|,iq

(13)

in the unknown parameters. Consequently, the resulting estimate of the full time-varying marginal effect ps,|qi in (10) is obtained as

ps,|qi,t = 0s,|pi ,q + Zti-1 p,qs|i

(14)

for given values Zti-1.

24

Since V aRqi,t is a function of W(i), conditional quantile independence in (12) is equivalent to Qp(st |W(ti), Wt(-i), Zit-1) = 0 where W(t-i) stacks W(tj) for all firms relevant for
(-i)
company i appearing in VaRq,t . Hence, with both quantile regression steps being linear, inserting (3) into (11) yields a full model for the system's tail risk in observable characteristics. However, direct one-step estimation is only feasible if the choice of W(i) and thus VaRq(-,ti) is still determined in a pre-step from individual VaR regressions. Model selection based on the full model of V aRs in observables is infeasible since correlation effects
among the huge number of regressors would produce unreliable results. Furthermore, individual parameters 0s,|pi,q and sp|,iq could not be identified without additional identification condition Qq(it|W(ti)) = 0, implicitly bringing back the first-step estimation. Therefore we use two-step estimation even if exact asymptotic confidence intervals are larger than
for an (infeasible) single step procedure. In contrast to mean regressions, such results are
non-standard in a quantile setting and are therefore provided in detail in Appendix A.1.
In finite samples, however, asymptotic distributions often only provide a poor approxi-
mation to the true distribution of the (scaled) difference between the estimator and the
true value if sample sizes are not sufficiently large. In case of quantile regressions, this
effect is even more pronounced, since valid estimates for the asymptotic variance have
poor non-parametric rates and thus require even larger sample sizes to obtain the same
precision.

Therefore, we suggest a procedure for testing significance and potential time-variation of ^ps,|qi,t which is valid in finite samples. For a given hypothesis H0, we use the test statistic

TT

ST

=

min
s0

t=1

p(Xts

-

Bts)

-

min
s RKB

t=1

p(Xts - Bts),

(15)

with the compound vector of all regressors in V aRs, Bt  (V aRti, V aRti · Zti-1, V(ti)), corresponding KB-parameter vector s, and 0 referring to the constrained set of parameters under H0. This test is an adaptation to the quantile setting of a method proposed by Chen, Ying, Zhang, and Zhao (2008) for median regressions. Direct operationaliza-

tion of the test is complicated by the fact that the asymptotic distribution of 15 involves

unknown terms, and, secondly, by the nonsmooth objective function of the quantile re-

gression, which causes inconsistency of conventional resampling techniques. Therefore,

25

following Chen, Ying, Zhang, and Zhao (2008) we apply an adjusted bootstrap method, which is described in detail in Appendix A.4.
3.3 Empirical Evidence on Systemic Risk Betas and Risk Rankings
We estimate systemic risk betas according to (12) with time variation in firm-specific characteristics (i.e. Zit = Cti). As in the first-step estimations, we choose q = 0.05, i.e., we model the loss which will not be exceeded with 95% probability. For notational convenience, we suppress the quantile index as we set p = q. Obtained realized systemic risk betas indeed contain information on systemic relevance beyond a company's network interconnectedness. This is illustrated in Figure 4 revealing only slightly positive dependencies between pagerank coefficients and realized systemic risk betas. Thus, more connected firms tend to be systemically more risky, see e.g. , Bank of America and American Express. With an R2 of 2% in the regression, the relationship, however, is not very strong indicating that the quantification of a firm's interconnectedness is not sufficient to assess its systemic relevance which directly depends on firm-specific and macroeconomic conditions. The latter is captured by realized systemic risk contributions but not necessarily by pagerank coefficients.
We statistically assess if a company's risk has a relevant direct impact on the system by testing for the significance of the respective systemic risk beta. Evaluating whether ts|i = 0 requires testing for the joint significance of all variables driving a firm's marginal impact. Thus, we test the hypothesis
H1 : 0s|i = Ms|iMM = Ss|IiZE = Ls|Ei V = Bs|iM = Vs|iOL = 0.
Whether marginal effects on the system are indeed time-varying in firm-specific characteristics can be tested by the joint hypothesis
H2 : Ms|iMM = Ss|IiZE = Ls|Ei V = Bs|iM = Vs|iOL = 0.
26

If this hypothesis is not rejected, we re-specify the systemic risk beta as being constant, i.e., ts|i = s|i, re-estimate the model without interaction variables and test the hypothesis
H3 : s|i = 0 .
We find the majority of firms having a significant systemic risk beta which is classified as being time-varying in approximately 50% of all cases. In contrast, for approximately 25% of all firms we do not find systemic risk betas which are significantly different from zero. Table 4 reports the p-values of the respective underlying tests which are performed using the wild bootstrap procedure illustrated in Appendix A.4 based on 2, 000 resamples of the test statistic.15 We consider effects as being significant if p-values are below 10%. Then, a company is defined as systemically relevant if an increase in its possible loss position, given all economic state variables and i-specific risk inflows from other companies, induces a significantly higher potential systemic loss. This requires its systemic risk beta to be significant and nonnegative.16
Table 5 lists all systemically relevant companies for the period from 2000 to 2008, ranked according to their average realized systemic risk contributions ^¯s|i. JP Morgan, American Express, Bank of America and Citigroup are identified as the (on average) most systemically risky companies. According to our network analysis above, these firms are categorized into the group of risk amplifiers which are strongly interconnected and should be closely supervised. To judge the validity and quality of our assessment based on market data, we compare our results with the outcomes of the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) conducted by the Federal Reserve in spring 2009, right after the end of our sample period. In this analysis, the Fed could draw on detailed non-public confidential balance sheet information to classify the 19 largest bank holding companies according to
15Because of multi-collinearity of time variation effects in firm characteristics for systemic risk betas, the interpretation of individual coefficients  might be misleading. Therefore, we refrain from reporting respective estimates.
16Since we do not impose a priori non-negativity restrictions, systemic risk betas can become negative at certain points in time. In a few cases we can directly attribute these effects to sudden time variations in one of the (interpolated) company-specific characteristics Zit-1 driving systemic risk betas temporarily into the negative region. These effects might be reduced by linking s|i in (10) to (local) time averages of Zti-1. Such a proceeding would stabilize systemic risk betas but at the cost of a potentially high loss of information.
27

estimates of potential lack in capital buffer for covering risks under an adverse macro scenario. For details, see Federal Reserve System (2009). The financial institution with the biggest potential lack of capital buffer according to the SCAP, Bank of America, ranks among our highest systemically relevant companies leading the ranking in June 2008 (Table 6 b). In addition, with Citigroup, FifthThird Bancorp, Morgan Stanley, PNC, Regions Financial and Wells Fargo we identify six out of eight banks contained in our database17 which, according to the SCAP results, were threatened by financial distress under more adverse market conditions. As we could in advance detect systemic riskiness of the majority of companies that were later found to face capital shortages in the stress test scenario of the SCAP, this confirms the quality of our method which is entirely based on only publicly available data.
Average systemic risk betas, however, only provide a rough picture of systemic importance as they aggregate companies' marginal systemic risk contributions and VaRs over time ignoring potential changes in the structure of the financial sector. In contrast, monitoring the evolution of systemic risk beta's over time provides a more informative picture on companies' specific systemic importance and yields valuable feedback from the market for forward-looking regulation. To illustrate the potential of our approach, we show the rankings at two specific time points: Table 6a gives the systemic risk ranking for the last week in March 2007, which was a relatively "calm" time before the start of the financial crisis. Table 6b, on the other hand, shows the ranking at the end of June 2008, shortly before the collapse of Lehman Brothers. Comparing the pre-crisis and post-crisis rankings, we observe clear changes. In most cases, systemic risk betas ­ and thus the magnitude of systemic risk contributions ­ significantly increased during the crisis. This is particularly observed for American Express, Bank of America, JP Morgan, Regions Financial and State Street, among others. Nevertheless, in some cases, as, e.g., for Citigroup and Morgan Stanley systemic risk contributions even declined.
During the crisis, we detect Bank of America as systemically most relevant. Our estimates indicate that its multiple risk channels in the center of the network, particularly to Morgan Stanley, American Express, Citigroup, Wells Fargo are systemically critical. Fig-
17Due to a lack of data, we cannot include KeyCorp and GMAC in our analysis which also have been found to be financially distressed in a critical macroeconomic environment.
28

ure 8 shows that Bank of America's systemic risk beta has been relatively stable before the financial crisis but significantly dropped after the issuance of the Federal Reserve's rescue packages. Nevertheless, its VaR and thus its realized systemic risk contribution strongly increased during the crisis. Our results also identify AIG as highly systemically relevant. Before the crisis, AIG was among the largest issuers and holders of credit default swaps (CDS) and other credit securitization derivatives. Its obviously strong exposure to mortgage default risks is reflected by a strong dependence to Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae, among others, as depicted in the network graph in Figure 5. The high systemic relevance of AIG is illustrated in the upper part of Figure 8 depicting ts|i, V aRti and the product thereof, ¯ts|i. In 2008, AIG faced tremendous write-downs which caused strong increases of the firm's VaR and the realized systemic risk contribution ¯ts|i. The rescue packages from the Federal Reserve amounting to USD 150 billion (see Schich, 2009) in September 2008, however, significantly reduced the risk of both AIG's and the entire system's failure. This is indicated by the strong decline of the companies' systemic risk beta in Figure 8). Due to the forward-looking character of systemic risk betas, the (anticipated) bailout has already been incorporated in the systemic risk ranking of end of June 2009 where AIG drops out of the list of systemically relevant companies. This is induced by strong changes in the companies' book-to-market ratio driving the systemic risk beta of AIG into the negative region.
By construction, realized systemic risk contributions ¯ts|i might vary over time through two channels: a time-varying beta, ts|i and a time-varying Value-at-Risk, V aRti. For selected companies, these effects are illustrated by Figure 2 in the introduction. In many cases we observe increases of realized systemic risk contributions which are mainly due to rising individual VaRs with systemic risk betas which even slightly decline from 2007 to 2008. Hence, companies' marginal contribution to the system VaR is widely unchanged while their exposure to idiosyncratic risk resulting from worse firm-specific and macroeconomic conditions has been dramatically increased. See, for instance, the first two companies in the 2008 ranking, Bank of America and American Express which, however, realize quite different combinations of marginal systemic contributions and idiosyncratic tail risk levels apparently facing different sources for systemic relevance. In both cases, the strong increase in VaR can be attributed to tail risk spillovers in the network, with,
29

e.g., Bank of America being particularly affected by Citigroup and Morgan Stanley. In several cases, increasing individual VaRs coincide with rising systemic risk betas. For instance, Wells Fargo is an example of a company which was not even identified as being systemically relevant in 2007 but faces a dramatic increase of both its systemic risk beta and its idiosyncratic tail risk making it highly systemically risky in 2008. Likewise, State Street, Progressive Ohio and Marshall & Isle (MI) face an increase of both ts|i and V aRti. Also here, sources for increasing effects can be found in the network structure. An exception is State Street which does not face significant risk spillovers from other companies and thus primarily depends on micro- and macroeconomic externalities. As a result, the company's high systemic relevance in 2008 is due to the combination of a moderately high systemic risk beta and severe idiosyncratic risk which in turn affect balance sheets and obligations of other firms. For two central nodes in the network, Citigroup and Morgan Stanley, however, declining systemic risk betas overcompensate increasing VaRs resulting in declining systemic relevance.
The results illustrate that realized systemic risk contributions conveniently condense information on banks' systemic importance. Though, the underlying driving forces of a bank's changed systemic relevance can be quite different. Therefore, only simultaneously analyzing and monitoring (i) network effects, (ii) sensitivity to micro- and macroeconomic conditions and (iii) time-variations in systemic risk betas provide the full picture of companies' specific role in the network and thus build a solid basis for regulatory measures.
4 Validity: Pre-Crisis Period
In the course of the financial crisis 2007-2009, a number of large institutions defaulted, were overtaken by others or supported by the government. As for our general empirical study, we required data for all considered institutions to be available over the entire period from beginning of 2000 to end of 2008, some of these companies could not be included. Nevertheless, to validate and robustify our findings, we perform an additional analysis
30

by re-estimating the model for the time period of January 1, 2000, to June 30, 2007 and including the investment banks Lehman Brothers and Merrill Lynch.
Because of the shorter estimation period, differences between estimated systemic risk contributions are not as pronounced as in the analysis covering the full time period. Therefore, as a sharp ranking of companies might not be very meaningful and hard to interpret in this context, Table 7 rather categorizes firms into groups according to quartiles of the distribution of realized systemic risk betas. Accordingly, we can distinguish between four broad classes: Firstly, there are 9 companies with VaRs that significantly influence the system VaR and are among the 25% largest average realized betas. The most prominent members of this group are AIG, Lehman Brothers, Morgan Stanley, JP Morgan and Goldman Sachs. The second group comprises systemically risky companies with significant systemic impact, whose average realized betas lie in the third quartile of the distribution. According to the estimates reported in Table 7, these magnitudes reflect a comparably high systemic relevance.18 Group 2 group contains mainly large depositories and investment banks including Bank of America, Merrill Lynch, Citigroup and Regions Financial, but also the mortage company Freddie Mac. Group 3 includes all companies with small but significant average systemic risk betas, in particular those below the median. Finally, the ones which, according to the significance test, are not considered as being systemically risky during the analyzed time period, are collected in Group 4.
In detail, we focus on four companies which were massively affected by the crisis: Lehman Brothers became insolvent on September 15, 2008, and was liquidated afterwards. Merrill Lynch announced a merger with Bank of America in September 2008, which was executed on January 1, 2009. Furthermore, excluding the crisis period itself may reveal the systemic relevance of the mortgage firm Freddie Mac, which is closely connected to the second largest real estate financing company Fannie Mae. Both were placed under conservatorship by the U.S. government during the course of the financial crisis. Finally, it is interesting to investigate the systemic riskiness of AIG, which faced major distress during the crisis and whose bailout was very expensive for the tax payers. As shown by Table 7 (with the specific companies marked in bold), all of these firms be-
18For a better exposition, we multiply all values of realized systemic risk betas with 100.
31

long to the group of systemically relevant firms with high or mid-sized average systemic risk betas.
Table 8 summarizes the results of our empirical analysis for the four case study candidates using only the pre-crisis data. Our network analysis reveals that almost all of the companies are subject to loss spillovers from direct competitors: Freddie Mac is influenced by risk transmissions of Fannie Mae, and vice versa. Despite Fannie Mae's low average realized systemic risk beta, this direct bi-directional risk dependence reveals the company's systemic relevance. Merrill Lynch influences Citigroup (C). TD Ameritrade Holding (AMTD) and E Trade Financial (ETFC) are large online brokers which operate on the same market as Lehman and Merrill Lynch and are identified as significant tail risk producer and receiver, respectively. Likewise, we identify tail risk dependencies between Lehman and both Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs, being Lehman's main competitors and the two largest investment banks in the U.S. during the estimation period. AIG is clearly the most interconnected firm in this case study. Its VaR is affected by the tail risks of eight competing insurers: Allstate (ALL), Chubb (CB), Hartford Financial (HIG), Lincoln National Corp. (LNC), MBIA, Marsh & McLennan Inc. (MMC), and Torchmark (TMK) as well as by Lehman Brothers (LEH). There are mutual spillovers with Citigroup, ETFC, CNA, HIG, and MMC. Additionally, AIG's losses have an effect on the VaRs of another three insurance companies, Aflac (AFL), Humana (HUM) and Unum (UNM).
All four companies of interest have a significant impact on the system. Focussing particularly on Lehman Brothers and Merrill Lynch, we show the time evolution of their realized risk betas and VaRs in Figures 9 and 10, respectively. It turns out that the realized systemic risk beta of Lehman steadily increases from 2005 to 2007. Interestingly, its VaR only increases in the second half of 2005 but remains widely on the same level afterwards. Hence, its growing systemic relevance is mainly due to rising marginal effects on the system and is not reflected in Lehman's idiosyncratic risk exposure. The jumps in the VaR (and thus also in the realized risk beta) are induced by relevant loss exceedances which only occur whenever one of Lehman's tail risk drivers (e.g., Morgan Stanley) exceeds his (unconditional 10%) loss quantile. This discreteness reflects the company's tail risk sensitivity to loss exceedances of competitors.
32

In case of Merrill Lynch, we observe high fluctuations of the realized systemic risk beta over the analyzed time period. As for Lehman Brothers, we observe clear differences in the paths of our systemic risk measure and VaR. For example, while its VaR, apart from some fluctuations keeps returning to the same level, its realized risk beta increases by more than 100% from mid of 2006 to mid of 2007. Hence, also here, the (realized) systemic risk beta reveals information on the company's systemic importance which cannot be detected by an analysis of the VaR solely. This finding strongly backs the usefulness of our proposed measure.
From these results, which are produced only from pre-crisis data, we can infer that in June 2007, each of the five financial institutions of interest was classified as being relevant for the stability of the U.S. financial system. Our findings indicate, firstly, that bailouts during the crisis were justified for Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and AIG. Also a failure of Merrill Lynch would have led to harsh systemic consequences which could be prevented by its merger with Bank of America in 2008. Secondly, the increasing systemic importance of Lehman Brothers could have been monitored and thus the impact of its bankruptcy could have been anticipated to a certain extent. The direct bi-directional linkage to JP Morgan, as well as the connections to Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs, which in turn are deeply interconnected, indicate a high risk for contagion as a result of Lehman's failure. Furthermore, our estimates show that Lehman's systemic risk contribution is only slightly lower than that of AIG, while it is substantially higher than that of, e.g., Freddie Mac. Given these results, bailing out the latter but not the former is not necessarily justifiable from a systemic risk management point of view. If these results had existed in advance, more effective regulatory measures could have been performed which could have helped reducing the extent of the financial crisis.
5 Conclusion
The worldwide financial crisis 2007-2009 has revealed that there is a need for a better understanding of systemic risk. Particularly in situations of distress, it is the intercon-
33

nectedness of financial companies which plays a major role but challenges quantitative analysis and the construction of appropriate risk measures.
In this paper, we propose a measure of firms' systemic relevance which accounts for dependence structures within the financial network given market externalities. Our analysis allows to statistically identify relevant channels of potential tail risk spillovers between firms constituting the topology of the financial network. Based on these relevant company-specific risk drivers, we measure a firm's idiosyncratic tail risk by explicitly accounting for its interconnectedness with other institutions. Our measure for a company's systemic risk contribution quantifies the impact on the risk of distress of the system induced by an increase in the risk of the specific company in a network setting. Both measures exclusively rely on publicly observable balance sheet and market characteristics and can thus be used for predictions in a stress test scenario.
Our empirical results show the interconnectedness of the U.S. financial system and clearly mark channels of relevant potential risk spillovers. In particular, we can classify companies into major risk producers, transmitters or recipients within the system. Moreover, at any specific point in time, firms can be ranked according to their estimated contribution to systemic risk given their role and position in the network. Monitoring companies' systemic relevance over time, thus allows to detect those firms which are most central for the stability of the system. In a case study, we highlight that our approach could have served as a solid basis for sensible forward-looking regulation before the start of the financial crisis in 2007.
Our approach is readily extendable in several directions. In particular, although the financial system is dominated by the U.S, it truly is a global business with many firms operating internationally. Detecting inter- and intra-country risk connections and measuring firms' global systemic relevance, should be straightforward with our proposed methodology. Moreover, whenever additional (firm-specific or market-wide) information is available as, e.g., reported to central banks, it can be directly incorporated into our measurement procedure. The data-driven selection step of relevant risk drivers then determines if and how it increases the precision of results.
34

Appendix A Econometric Methodology

A.1 Asymptotic Results for Two-Step Quantile Estimation

Under the adaptive choice of penalty parameter as described in the text, the LASSO selection

method is consistent with rate OP (

K (i) T

log(max(K,

T

)),

and

with

high

probability

the

coeffi-

cients selected of W, contain the the true coefficients also in finite samples. These results follow

directly from Belloni and Chernozhukov (2011). Furthermore, V aRi is consistently estimated

by the post-LASSO method described in the text which re-estimates the unrestricted model with W(i). In particular, for all q  I with I  (0, 1) being compact,

^qi - iq  OP (

K (i) log(max(K, T ))),
T

(A1)

since in our setting it is safe to assume that the number of wrongly selected components of W is

stochastically bounded by the number K(i) of components of W contained in the true model for

V aRi (see equation (2.16) in Belloni and Chernozhukov (2011)). We write in a slight abuse of

notation YT  OP (rT ), with YT being either OP (rT ) or even oP (rT ) for any random sequence

YT and deterministic rT  0. Note that in general for T  , both K and K(i) might grow

only extremely slowly in T , such that they can be treated close to being constants implying the

standard oracle bound OP (

log(T T

)

)

in

(A1).

If the true model is selected, we find for the asymptotic distribution of the individual VaR estimates for any q  [0, 1],19

1 T

^iq - qi

N

0,

q(1 - g2(G-1

q) (q))

E[W(i)W(i)

]-1

,

(A2)

where g(G-1(q)) denotes the density of the corresponding error i distribution at the qth quantile. This result is standard (see Koenker and Bassett, 1978). For the second step estimates, we derive the asymptotic distribution analogously to the two-step median results in Powell (1983)

K (i) T

(^0s,|pi ,q, ^sp|,iq, ^ps) - (0s,|pi ,q, sp|,iq, ps)

N

0, Q-1E

f

p(1 2(F

- p) -1(p))

p(st

)

-

p(1 - p) g2(G-1(p))

ps,|qi

p(ti), vp(Zt-1ti)

(A3) , (A4)

19Required assumptions of Belloni and Chernozhukov (2011) and quantile analogies to Powell (1983) are fulfilled in our setting.

35

where in the scalar factor, f (F -1(p)) is the density of the corresponding error s at the pth quantile, the function vp of a vector applies p to each of its components, and ps,|qi = (0s,|pi ,q, sp|,iq). The remaining main part Q in the variance is given by Q = H E[AA ]H with A = (W(i), vec(Zt-1 · W(i) ), VaR(-i)). Denote by I and 0 identity and null matrices, respectively, and by 1 a vector of
ones of appropriate dimension. Then,

 diag(qi ,2)



 

0



H = 

0



 

I



0

0 diag(qi ,1)
0 0 0

···0··· ···0··· diag(vec(1dz · qi )) ···0··· ···0···

 ···0···



···0···

 



···0···

 



···0···

 



Id(-i) ×d(-i)

where dZ is the dimension of Z which is 3 in our application, d(-i) is the dimension of VaR(t-i), and coefficients iq,2 are those components of iq for regressors which appear both in the first and the second step. Correspondingly, qi ,1 are coefficients of regressors which just appear in the first
step of the individual VaR regression. Note that in the variance matrix there is a distinction in  for parts of V which are also controls in V aRi and VaRt(-i), which just appear in V aRs.

A.2 Choice of the Company-specific LASSO penalty parameter i
We determine i in a data-driven way following a bootstrap type procedure as suggested by Belloni and Chernozhukov (2011):

Step 1 Take T iid draws from U [0, 1] independent of W1, . . . , WT denoted as U1, . . . , UT . Conditional on observations of W, calculate the corresponding value of the random variable,

i = T max 1 T Wt,k(q - I(Ut  q)) .

1kK T
t=1

^k q(1 - q)

Step 2 Repeat step 1 for B=500 times generating the empirical distribution of i conditional on W through i1, . . . , iB. For a confidence level   1/K in the selection, set

i = c · Q(i, 1 - |Wt),

where Q(i, 1-|Wt) denotes the (1-)-quantile of i given Wt and c  2 is a constant.
36

The choice of  is a trade-off between a high confidence level and a corresponding high regularization bias from high penalty levels in (7). As in the simulation results in Belloni and Chernozhukov (2011), we choose  = 0.1, which suffices to get optimal rates of the post-penalization estimators below. Finally, the parameter c is selected in a data-dependent way such that the in-sample predictive ability of the resulting VaR specification is maximized. (Belloni and Chernozhukov (2011) proceed in a similar way). The latter is evaluated in terms of its best backtesting performance according to the procedure described below.

A.3 Backtest for the Model Fit for V aRi

As suggested by Berkowitz, Christoffersen, and Pelletier (2009), for each institution i, we measure VaR exceedances as Iti  I(Xti < -V aRqi ,t). If the chosen model is correct, then,

E[Iti|t] = q ,

(A5)

where t is the information set up to t. The VaR is estimated correctly, if independently for each day of the covered period, the probability of exceeding the VaR equals q. Similar to Engle and Manganelli (2004), Kuester, Mittnik, and Paolella (2006) and Taylor (2008), we include a constant, three lagged values of It and the current VaR estimate in the information set t. Then, condition (A5) can be checked by estimating a logistic regression model

Iti =  + At + Ut,

with covariates At

=

(Iti-1,

Iti-2,

Iti-3,

V

i
aRt-1)

.

Denote by

I¯i

the sample mean

of the

binary

response Iti and define Flog(·) as the cumulative distribution function of the logistic distribution.

Then, under the joint hypothesis

H0 :  = q and 1 = · · · 4 = 0,

the asymptotic distribution of the corresponding likelihood ratio test statistic is LR = -2(ln Lr - ln Lu) a 25 .

(A6)

37

Here, ln Lu =

n t=1

Iti ln Flog( + At) + (1 - Iti) ln

1 - Flog( + At)

is the unrestricted

log likelihood function which under H0 simplifies to ln Lr = nI¯i ln(q) + n(1 - I¯i) ln(1 - q).

A.4 Bootstrap Procedure for the Joint Significance Test

The asymptotic distribution of the test statistic introduced in Section 3.2,

TT

ST

=

min
s0

p(Xts
t=1

-

Bts)

-

min
s RKB

p(Xts
t=1

- Bts),

(A7)

involves the probability density function of the underlying error terms and is not feasible. Furthermore, bootstrapping ST directly would yield inconsistent results. Therefore, we re-sample from the adjusted statistic

TT

ST

=

min
s0

t=1

wtp(Xts

-

Bts)

-

min
s RKB

t=1

wtp(Xts

-

Bts)

TT
- wtp(Xts - Bt^sc) - wtp(Xts - Bt^s) ,

t=1 t=1

(A8)

where ^cs denotes the constrained estimate of s, and {wt} is a sequence of standard exponentially distributed random variables, having both mean and variance equal to one. According to Chen, Ying, Zhang, and Zhao (2008), the empirical distribution of ST provides a good approximation of the distribution of ST . Thus, if the test statistic ST exceeds some large quantile of the re-sampling distribution of ST , the null hypothesis is rejected.

The proposed testing method does not require re-sampling of observations but is entirely based on the original sample. This provides significant gains in accuracy in the two-step regression setting as opposed to standard pairwise bootstrap techniques as a further alternative. A pre-analysis shows that this wild bootstrap type procedure is valid in the presented form as any serial dependence in the data is sufficiently captured by the regressors in the reduced-form relation not requiring block-bootstrap techniques.20
20Pairwise block-bootstrap yields block lengths of one according to the standard procedure of Lahiri (2001). Results are available upon request.

38

Appendix B Tables and Figures

Table 1: Included financial institutions in alphabetical order within sectors.

Depositories (21)

Others (11)

Insurance Comp. (20)

BB T Corp (BBT)

American Express Co (AXP)

AFLAC Inc (AFL)

Bank of New York Mellon (BK)

Eaton Vance Corp (EV)

Allstate Corp (ALL)

Bank of America Corp (BAC)

Fed. Home Loan Mortg. Corp (FRE) American International Group (AIG)

Citigroup Inc (C)

Fed. National Mortgage Assn (FNM) AON Corp (AON)

Comerica Inc (CMA)

Fifth Third Bancorp (FITB)

Berkley WR Corp (WRB)

Hudson City Bancorp Inc. (HCBK) Franklin Resources Inc (BEN)

CIGNA Corp (CI)

Huntington Bancshares Inc. (HBAN) Legg Mason Inc (LM)

C N A Financial Corp. (CNA)

JP Morgan Chase & Co (JPM)

Leucadia National Corp (LUK)

Chubb Corp (CB)

M & T Bank Corp. (MTB)

SEI Investments Company (SEIC)

Cincinnati Financial Corp (CINF)

Marshall & Ilsley Corp (MI)

TD Ameritrade Holding Corp (AMTD) Coventry Health Care Inc (CVH)

NY Community Bankcorp (NYB) Union Pacific Corp (UNP)

Hartford Financial (HIG)

Northern Trust Corp (NTRS)

HEALTH NET INC (HNT)

Peoples United Financial Inc. (PBCT) Broker-Dealers (7)

Humana Inc (HUM)

PNC Financial Services Group (PNC) E Trade Financial Corp (ETFC)

Lincoln National Corp. (LNC)

Financial Corp New (RF) S L M Corp. State Street Corp (STT)

Goldman Sachs Group Inc (GS) Lehman Brothers (LEH) Merrill Lynch (ML)

Loews Corp (L) Marsh & McLennan Inc. (MMC) MBIA Inc (MBI)

Suntrust Banks Inc (STI)

Morgan Stanley Dean Witter & Co (MS) Progressive Corp Ohio (PGR)

Synovus Financial Corp (SNV)

Schwab Charles Corp New (SCHW) Torchmark Corp (TMK)

Wells Fargo & Co (WFC)

T Rowe Price Group Inc. (TROW)

Unum Group (UNM)

Zions Bancorp (ZION)

 included only in the case study

39

Table 2: Exemplary post-LASSO quantile regressions for V aRi with q = 0.05. Regressors were selected by LASSO as outlined in Secion 2.1. Ex.j is the loss
exceedance of company j, all other regressors are as in Section 1.2.

40

(Intercept) Ex.C Ex.JPM Ex.LM Ex.MS Ex.SCHW
(Intercept) Ex.AIG Ex.AON Ex.BAC Ex.EV Ex.GS Ex.HBAN Ex.HCBK Ex.MTB Ex.SCHW Ex.SEIC Ex.STT
(Intercept) Ex.AMTD Ex.AON Ex.BBT Ex.FITB Ex.HBAN Ex.PBCT Ex.STI Ex.ZION BM VOL
(Intercept) Ex.AIG Ex.FRE

Value
-0.046 -0.239 -0.014 -0.215 -0.403 -0.282

Std. Error
Goldman Sachs 0.004 0.205 0.119 0.111 0.079 0.244

-0.041 -0.106 0.445 -0.604 -0.158 -0.634 -0.273 -0.452 -0.269 -0.381 -0.229 -0.174

Morgan Stanley
0.003 0.026 0.145 0.145 0.134 0.121 0.136
0.28 0.193 0.116 0.154 0.176

Regions Financial

-0.004

0.004

-0.091

0.04

-0.256

0.086

-0.307

0.104

0.032

0.087

-0.042

0.064

-0.307

0.085

-0.244

0.114

-0.196

0.1

0.024

0.007

0.251

0.16

-0.049 -0.227 -1.007

Fannie Mae
0.003 0.231 0.121

t-ratio
-12.54 -1.17
-0.121 -1.932 -5.096 -1.153
-16.017 -4.036 3.066 -4.157 -1.179 -5.236 -2.006 -1.611 -1.392 -3.294 -1.485 -0.986
-1.072 -2.274 -2.998
-2.95 0.37 -0.661 -3.598 -2.137 -1.947 3.221 1.568
-17.075 -0.981 -8.298

p-value
0.000 0.243 0.904 0.054 0.000 0.249
0.000 0.000 0.002 0.000 0.239 0.000 0.045 0.108 0.165 0.001 0.138 0.325
0.284 0.023 0.003 0.003 0.712 0.509
0 0.033 0.052 0.001 0.118
0.000 0.327 0.000

(Intercept) Ex.FRE Ex.MBI Ex.RF Ex.TMK
(Intercept) Ex.AFL Ex.ALL Ex.BBT Ex.HIG Ex.LNC Ex.NTRS Ex.SEIC Ex.UNM Ex.UNP repo
(Intercept) Ex.BAC Ex.BK Ex.C Ex.GS Ex.PNC Ex.SCHW
(Intercept) Ex.AFL Ex.BAC Ex.BBT Ex.BEN Ex.CINF Ex.EV Ex.L Ex.SEIC Ex.SLM Ex.STT Ex.TROW

Value Std. Error

t-ratio

American International Group

-0.043

0.003 -14.026

-0.201

0.014 -14.033

-0.336

0.138

-2.423

-0.455

0.051

-8.975

-0.813

0.721

-1.127

-0.019 -0.332 -0.256 -0.296 -0.084 0.002 -0.002 -0.243 -0.088 -0.242 0.031

Torchmark
0.003 0.169 0.207 0.223 0.175 0.135 0.115 0.12 0.179 0.242 0.017

-7.203 -1.962 -1.237 -1.329 -0.483 0.018 -0.015 -2.023 -0.489
-1 1.78

-0.040 -0.229 -0.237 -0.380 -0.253 -0.274 -0.410

JP Morgan
0.003 0.133 0.129
0.22 0.154 0.077 0.118

-12.963 -1.724 -1.842 -1.729 -1.648 -3.583 -3.472

American Express

-0.035

0.003

-0.42

0.408

-0.361

0.205

-0.145

0.126

-0.112

0.139

-0.153

0.153

-0.181

0.163

0.014

0.114

-0.106

0.09

0.073

0.067

-0.351

0.159

-0.3 0.126

-11.723 -1.03 -1.757
-1.151 -0.808 -0.999 -1.112 0.122 -1.186
1.09 -2.2 -2.39

p-value
0.000 0.000 0.016 0.000 0.260
0 0.05 0.217 0.184 0.63 0.986 0.988 0.044 0.625 0.318 0.076
0.000 0.085 0.066 0.084 0.199 0.000 0.001
0 0.303
0.08 0.25 0.42 0.318 0.267 0.903 0.236 0.276 0.028 0.017

Table 3: Tail risk cross dependencies: For each company, we list loss exceedances selected by LASSO as regressors for the V aRi-model (q=0.05) ('Influencing companies') and companies for which the

respective loss exceedance has been selected ('Influenced companies').

Name Influencing companies

Influenced companies

Broker Dealers

ETFC AMTD,GS,MS

AMTD,C

GS C,JPM,LM,MS,SCHW

BEN,C,ETFC,JPM,LM,MS,SCHW

MS AIG,AON,BAC,EV,GS,HBAN,HCBK,MTB,SCHW,SEIC,STT AMTD,BAC,EV,GS,HUM,LNC,ETFC,SEIC

SCHW AMTD,GS,JPM,NTRS,TROW

AMTD,MS,GS,JPM

TROW AMTD,BEN,EV,JPM,LUK,NTRS,SEIC,SNV

AON,MBI,MMC,AMTD,AXP,BEN,EV,NTRS,SCHW

Depositories

BAC AON,AXP,C,HBAN,LM,MS,MTB,PBCT,PNC,SEIC,STI,WFC AXP,BBT,C,CMA,HCBK,JPM,LM,MBI,MS,MTB,PNC,STI,WFC

BBT BAC,FITB,MTB,NTRS,STI,TMK,UNP,WFC

AXP,BEN,CMA,FRE,MTB,RF,TMK,UNP,WFC,ZION

BK AXP,JPM,MTB,NTRS,SNV,STT,WFC

CMA,JPM,NTRS,SEIC,SNV

C BAC,ETFC,FITB,GS,JPM,LNC,LUK,MBI,MTB

BAC,GS,JPM,LUK

CMA AON,BAC,BBT,BK,HBAN,RF,SNV,WFC

AON,PNC,SNV,ZION

HBAN AON,LNC,RF,STI,ZION

AON,BAC,CMA,EV,LNC,MS,PBCT,RF,ZION

HCBK AON,BAC,MBI,MTB,NYB

MS,MTB

JPM BAC,BK,C,GS,PNC,SCHW

BK,C,GS,SCHW,SEIC,TROW

MI MMC,TMK

HIG,MMC

MTB BAC,BBT,HCBK,NYB,SNV,ZION

AON,BAC,BBT,BK,HCBK,MS,SNV,WFC,ZION,C

NTRS BEN,BK,LUK,MMC,SEIC,STT,TROW

AFL,AMTD,BBT,BEN,BK,HIG,MMC,PGR,SCHW,TMK,TROW,LUK,STT

NYB PBCT,WFC

MTB,SLM,WFC,HCBK,PBCT

PBCT HBAN,NYB

AON,BAC,CB,NYB,RF

PNC BAC,CMA,STT,TMK,WFC,ZION

BAC,JPM,ZION

RF AMTD,AON,BBT,FITB,HBAN,PBCT,STI,ZION

AIG,AON,CMA,EV,FITB,HBAN,MBI,SNV,STI,ZION

SLM AON,AXP,FRE,MBI,NYB

AON,AXP,BEN,EV,FITB,MBI

SNV BK,CMA,FITB,MTB,RF,ZION

BEN,BK,CMA,FITB,MTB,TROW

STI AON,BAC,FITB,LNC,RF,WFC,ZION

AFL,AON,BAC,BBT,FITB,HBAN,RF,ZION,CINF,HUM,UNM,WFC

STT AXP,NTRS

AXP,BK,NTRS,PNC,MS

WFC BAC,BBT,CB,LNC,MTB,NYB,STI

FITB,PNC,STI,AFL,BAC,BBT,BK,CMA,NYB

ZION BBT,CMA,HBAN,MTB,PNC,RF,STI

AON,RF,FITB,HBAN,LNC,MTB,PNC,SNV,STI

Insurance Companies

AFL ALL,AON,CNA,EV,NTRS,SEIC,STI,TMK,WFC

AXP,CB,EV,PGR,TMK,UNM

AIG FRE,MBI,RF,TMK

FNM,MBI,MS

ALL CB,CNA,L,LNC,TMK

AFL,PGR,TMK,UNM

AON CMA,HBAN,MBI,MTB,PBCT,RF,SLM,STI,TROW,ZION

AFL,BAC,BEN,CMA,EV,FITB,HBAN,HCBK,LM,MBI,MS,RF,SLM,STI

CB AFL,L,LNC,PBCT,PGR

ALL,CINF,EV,HIG,L,WFC,WRB

CI CNA,HNT,HUM,LNC

HNT,HUM,LNC

CINF CB,MBI,STI

AXP,LM

CNA EV,L,LNC,MBI

AFL,ALL,CI,L,LNC,MBI

CVH HUM

SEIC

HIG CB,L,LNC,MI,NTRS,TMK

HUM,LNC,TMK

HNT CI,EV,HUM,LM,LNC,PGR

CI,HUM,LM

HUM CI,HIG,HNT,MS,STI

CI,HNT

L CB,CNA,LNC,TMK,UNP

ALL,AXP,CB,CNA,HIG,LNC,UNM,UNP

LNC CI,CNA,EV,HBAN,HIG,L,MS,SEIC,TMK,ZION

ALL,C,CB,CNA,HBAN,HIG,HNT,L,SEIC,STI,TMK,UNM,WFC,CI

MBI AIG,AON,BAC,BEN,CNA,FRE,RF,SLM,TROW

AIG,AON,BEN,C,CINF,HCBK,SLM,CNA,LM

MMC MI,NTRS,PGR,SEIC,TROW,UNM

MI,NTRS,UNM

PGR AFL,ALL,NTRS,WRB

MMC,CB,HNT,WRB

TMK AFL,ALL,BBT,HIG,LNC,NTRS,SEIC,UNM,UNP

AFL,BBT,EV,L,LNC,MI,PNC,AIG,ALL,HIG

UNM AFL,ALL,L,LNC,MMC,STI

TMK,MMC

WRB BEN,CB,PGR

PGR

Others

AMTD ETFC,MS,NTRS,SCHW,SEIC,TROW

ETFC,RF,SCHW,TROW

AXP AFL,BAC,BBT,BEN,CINF,EV,L,SEIC,SLM,STT,TROW

BAC,BEN,BK,EV,SLM,STT

BEN AON,AXP,BBT,EV,GS,LM,MBI,NTRS,SLM,SNV,TROW

AXP,EV,LM,MBI,NTRS,TROW,WRB

EV AFL,AON,AXP,BEN,CB,HBAN,MS,RF,SEIC,SLM,TMK,TROW AFL,AXP,BEN,CNA,FRE,HNT,LM,LNC,MS,TROW

FITB AON,LUK,RF,SLM,SNV,STI,WFC,ZION

BBT,C,FRE,RF,SNV,STI

FNM AIG,FRE

FRE

FRE BBT,EV,FITB,FNM,LUK

AIG,MBI,SLM,FNM

LM AON,BAC,BEN,CINF,EV,GS,HNT,MBI

BAC,BEN,GS,HNT,LUK

LUK C,LM,NTRS

C,FITB,FRE,NTRS,TROW

SEIC BK,CVH,JPM,LNC,MS

AFL,AMTD,AXP,BAC,EV,LNC,MMC,MS,NTRS,TMK,TROW

UNP BBT,L

BBT,TMK,L

41

Table 4: p-values for the test on significance of systemic risk betas (Hypothesis H1) and for the test

on constancy of systemic risk betas (Hypothesis H2). For the second panel, we include in parentheses

the p-values for the test on significance of systemic risk betas in case H1 is rejected but H2 is not

(Hypothesis H3).

Name

pvH1 pvH2 (pvH3)

Companies with significant and time-varying ts|i

AMERICAN EXPRESS

0.001 0.006

AMERICAN INTL.GP.

0.002 0.000

BANK OF AMERICA

0.002 0.001

CHARLES SCHWAB

0.019 0.013

CHUBB

0.017 0.015

CIGNA

0.001 0.013

CINCINNATI FINL.

0.010 0.004

CITIGROUP

0.026 0.066

COMERICA

0.016 0.020

FANNIE MAE

0.001 0.000

FIFTH THIRD BANCORP

0.039 0.021

FRANKLIN RESOURCES

0.028 0.030

FREDDIE MAC

0.098 0.092

HARTFORD FINL.SVS.GP.

0.001 0.001

HUDSON CITY BANC.

0.043 0.035

HUNTINGTON BCSH.

0.010 0.011

LEGG MASON

0.026 0.060

LEUCADIA NATIONAL

0.041 0.016

LINCOLN NAT.

0.062 0.026

M & T BK.

0.033 0.021

MARSH & MCLENNAN

0.003 0.002

MARSHALL & ILSLEY

0.020 0.019

MORGAN STANLEY

0.041 0.095

PNC FINANCIAL SVS. GP

0.012 0.012

PROGRESSIVE OHIO

0.007 0.003

REGIONS FINANCIAL

0.034 0.029

STATE STREET

0.054 0.049

T ROWE PRICE GP.

0.090 0.076

TORCHMARK

0.002 0.001

UNION PACIFIC

0.040 0.035

UNUM GROUP

0.079 0.097

W R BERKLEY

0.007 0.037

WELLS FARGO & CO

0.015 0.027

ZIONS BANCORP.

0.095 0.100

Companies with significant but constant s|i

AON

0.063 0.192 (0.135)

E TRADE FINANCIAL

0.072 0.160 (0.233)

JP MORGAN CHASE & CO.

0.014 0.237 (0.047)

NY.CMTY.BANC.

0.040 0.132 (0.088)

SEI INVESTMENTS

0.014 0.115 (0.025)

TD AMERITRADE HOLDING

0.049 0.131 (0.188)

Companies with insignificant s|i

AFLAC

0.220 -

ALLSTATE

0.114 -

BANK OF NEW YORK MELLON 0.199 -

BB &T

0.120 -

CNA FINANCIAL

0.410 -

COVENTRY HEALTH CARE

0.257 -

EATON VANCE NV.

0.276 -

GOLDMAN SACHS GP.

0.667 -

HEALTH NET

0.371 -

HUMANA

0.189 -

LOEWS

0.276 -

MBIA

0.235 -

NORTHERN TRUST

0.305 -

PEOPLES UNITED FINANCIAL 0.105 -

SLM

0.391 -

SUNTRUST BANKS

0.213 -

SYNOVUS FINL.

0.289 -

42

Table 5: Ranking of average systemic risk contributions based on realized systemic risk betas. The third column lists loss exceedances that are included in the respective company's V aRi-regression. Estimation period 2000-2008 Q3. Systemic risk contributions based on time-varying betas are marked by .

Rank
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26

Name
JP MORGAN CHASE & CO AMERICAN EXPRESS BANK OF AMERICA CITIGROUP LEGG MASON REGIONS FINANCIAL MARSHALL & ILSLEY MARSH & MCLENNAN MORGAN STANLEY AMERICAN INTL.GP. PROGRESSIVE OHIO STATE STREET ZIONS BANCORP FIFTH THIRD BANCORP NY.CMTY.BANC. PNC FINANCIAL SVS. GP FANNIE MAE FRANKLIN RESOURCES CHARLES SCHWAB CHUBB WELLS FARGO & CO FREDDIE MAC HARTFORD FINL.SVS.GP. CINCINNATI FINL. TORCHMARK UNUM GROUP

¯as|vi · 102 1.41 1.22 1.01 0.87 0.83 0.72 0.65 0.63 0.62 0.61 0.58 0.55 0.51 0.49 0.49 0.47 0.45 0.34 0.33 0.30 0.28 0.19 0.19 0.16 0.12 0.04

influencing companies
BAC,BK,C,GS,PNC,SCHW AFL,BAC,BBT,BEN,CINF,EV,L,SEIC,SLM,STT,TROW AON,AXP,C,HBAN,LM,MS,MTB,PBCT,PNC,SEIC,STI,WFC BAC,ETFC,FITB,GS,JPM,LNC,LUK,MBI,MTB AON,BAC,BEN,CINF,EV,GS,HNT,MBI AMTD,AON,BBT,FITB,HBAN,PBCT,STI,ZION,, MMC,TMK MI,NTRS,PGR,SEIC,TROW,UNM AIG,AON,BAC,EV,GS,HBAN,HCBK,MTB,SCHW,SEIC,STT FRE,MBI,RF,TMK AFL,ALL,NTRS,WRB AXP,NTRS BBT,CMA,HBAN,MTB,PNC,RF,STI, AON,LUK,RF,SLM,SNV,STI,WFC,ZION PBCT,WFC BAC,CMA,STT,TMK,WFC,ZION AIG,FRE AON,AXP,BBT,EV,GS,LM,MBI,NTRS,SLM,SNV,TROW AMTD,GS,JPM,NTRS,TROW AFL,L,LNC,PBCT,PGR BAC,BBT,CB,LNC,MTB,NYB,STI BBT,EV,FITB,FNM,LUK CB,L,LNC,MI,NTRS,TMK CB,MBI,STI AFL,ALL,BBT,HIG,LNC,NTRS,SEIC,UNM,UNP, AFL,ALL,L,LNC,MMC,STI

43

Table 6: Rankings of relevant systemic risk contributions based on estimated realized systemic risk betas ¯ts|i at the specific point in time. Estimated systemic risk betas and VaRs are listed in addition illustrating the different sources of variation in ¯ts|i. Systemic
risk contributions based on time-varying betas are marked by .

a) End of March 2007 (before the beginning of the financial crisis)

Rank Name

¯2s|0i07 · 102

^2s0|i07

1 CITIGROUP

1.78

2 AMERICAN EXPRESS

1.35

3 BANK OF AMERICA

1.16

4 JP MORGAN CHASE & CO. 1.05

5 MORGAN STANLEY 6 LEGG MASON

1.01 0.98

7 MARSH & MCLENNAN

0.83

8 REGIONS FINANCIAL

0.78

9 PNC FINANCIAL SVS. GP 0.77

10 CHUBB 11 AMERICAN INTL.GP.

0.74 0.61

12 FRANKLIN RESOURCES

0.60

13 STATE STREET

0.51

14 FIFTH THIRD BANCORP

0.50

15 PROGRESSIVE OHIO

0.42

16 NY.CMTY.BANC.

0.41

17 MARSHALL & ILSLEY

0.40

18 TORCHMARK

0.39

19 HARTFORD FINL.SVS.GP. 0.38

20 ZIONS BANCORP. 21 CHARLES SCHWAB

0.26 0.25

22 FREDDIE MAC

0.23

23 LEUCADIA NATIONAL

0.19

24 CINCINNATI FINL.

0.13

25 FANNIE MAE 26 UNUM GROUP

0.09 0.23

27 T ROWE PRICE GP.

0.06

28 LINCOLN NAT.

0.04

0.263 0.387 0.304 0.265 0.146 0.205 0.222 0.202 0.248 0.240 0.143 0.143 0.114 0.104 0.092 0.090 0.088 0.173 0.099 0.115 0.042 0.057 0.057 0.026 0.019 0.045 0.014 0.010

i
V aR2007
0.068 0.035 0.038 0.040 0.069 0.048 0.037 0.038 0.031 0.031 0.043 0.042 0.045 0.048 0.046 0.045 0.045 0.023 0.039 0.054 0.060 0.041 0.033 0.050 0.049 0.051 0.043 0.036

b) End of June 2008 (during the financial crisis)

Rank Name

¯2s|0i08 · 102

1 BANK OF AMERICA 2 AMERICAN EXPRESS 3 WELLS FARGO & CO 4 MARSHALL & ILSLEY

2.86 2.78 2.51 2.31

5 JP MORGAN CHASE & CO. 2.22

6 PROGRESSIVE OHIO

1.97

7 LEGG MASON

1.96

8 REGIONS FINANCIAL

1.86

9 MARSH & MCLENNAN

1.76

10 STATE STREET

1.44

11 NY.CMTY.BANC.

1.12

12 PNC FINANCIAL SVS. GP 1.09

13 CHUBB

1.07

14 TORCHMARK

1.00

15 CHARLES SCHWAB

0.91

16 CITIGROUP

0.90

17 MORGAN STANLEY

0.61

18 ZIONS BANCORP.

0.58

19 UNUM GROUP

0.34

20 UNION PACIFIC

0.27

21 HARTFORD FINL.SVS.GP. 0.24

22 FRANKLIN RESOURCES

0.17

23 T ROWE PRICE GP.

0.01

44

^2s0|i08
0.186 0.278 0.186 0.516 0.265 0.380 0.137 0.107 0.471 0.171 0.090 0.153 0.176 0.177 0.149 0.072 0.074 0.058 0.033 0.047 0.012 0.026 0.001

i
V aR2008
0.154 0.100 0.135 0.045 0.084 0.052 0.143 0.173 0.037 0.084 0.125 0.071 0.061 0.057 0.060 0.124 0.083 0.100 0.104 0.056 0.201 0.064 0.102

Table 7: Group ranking of systemic risk contributions for the pre-crisis period 2000 - mid 2007. The upper part, group 1 ('high'), contains companies with significant ts|i and the highest quartile of significant betas: ¯^as|vi · 100  [0.5, 1.3]. Group 2 refers to the third quartile ('medium') with ^¯as|vi · 100  [0.03, 0.49] and Group 3 to realized systemic risk betas lower than the median value ('small'), for which ¯^as|vi · 100 < 0.01. Group 4 includes companies not determined to be systemically risky during
the estimation period, i.e., those with insignificant systemic risk betas. Case study companies are marked
in bold.

Systemic risk contributions Companies

Group 1 'high'

AIG, LEH, MS, JPM, GS,STT, CINF, LM, PBCT

Group 2 'medium'

FRE, ML, BAC, C, RF, AXP, PNC,CNA, TROW, NTRS

Group 3 'low'

FNM, WFC, EV, TMK, BBT, AFL, HUM, MI, CMA, BK, LNC, ALL, HNT, CB, CVH, SLM, ETFC

AMTD, AON, BEN, CI, FITB, HBAN, HCBK, HIG, L, LUK,

Group 4

MBI, MMC, MTB, NYB, PGR, SCHW, SEIC, SNV, STI, UNM,

UNP, WRB, ZION

Table 8: Summary of estimation and test results for the four case study companies: loss exceedances

influencing each company's VaR, the most important other VaRs influenced, joint significance tests on ts|i = 0 and estimated average systemic risk contributions and betas. Estimation period: January 2000 -

June 2007.

Name

incluenced by

FREDDIE AON, BBT, EV, FITB, FNM, HUM, MBI

main influences BBT, FNM

overall sign. average ¯st|i · 100 average ts|i 0.048 0.38 0.092

MERRILL AMTD, CB, CNA, HCBK, L, NYB, WRB

C

0.051 0.03 0.030

LEHMAN AMTD, AON, BEN, GS, JPM, LM, LUK, MI, MS AIG, AXP, ETFC, JPM 0.041 0.79 0.176

AIG ALL, C, CB, CNA, ETFC, HIG, LEH, LNC, MBI, AFL, C, CNA, HIG, 0.026 0.73 0.210

MMC, SCHW, STT, TMK

HUM, MMC, UNM

 time-varying betas

45

STT
UNP
MMC MI
CVH

PNC BK
AMTD

JP Morgan

CMA LUK

SNV

MTB

FITB

BBT Wells Fargo

ZION

RF

Bank of America

AIG Citigroup

HCBK SLM

NYB

TROW

NTRS Charles Schwab

SEIC TMK

American Express

Morgan Stanley
EV STI

AON
BEN HBAN

Goldman Sachs ETFC MBI
Fannie Mae PBCT
LM

AFL

LNC

Freddy Mac

HIG UNM

L

CB CNA

HUM

PGR

ALL

HNT

CINF WRB

46

CI
Figure 5: Full network graph for the system of the 57 largest financial companies in the U.S. For simplicity, arrows only mark risk spillovers effects without referring to their respective size. Otherwise arrows and colors are as defined in Figure 1. A complete list of firms' acronyms is contained in Table 1. The graphical allocation is obtained via the Fruchtermann-Reingold algorithm which minimizes the total length of all arrows.

Figure 6: Full Network graphs of Citigroup (C) and Morgan Stanley (MS) highlighting risk drivers and risk recipients directly connected to the respective companies with bold arrows according to the respective size of the effect. Arrows, colors and acronyms are as in Figure 5. For simplicity, all other links just mark spillover effects without referring to size. The list of firm acronyms is contained in Table 1.
47

C

PNC BK WFC NYB STT

MI

JPM AXP BEN
EV

BBT

AMTD

PBCT

SEIC

BAC

LM

RF

FITB

SLM

UNP

HBAN

LUK

CMA

FNM

NTRS

FRE

STI

WRB

MTB

PGR

SNV

CB

ZION

ALL

HCBK

CNA

TROW

L

SCHW

LNC

MS

MBI

ETFC

CINF

GS

HIG CVH MMCUNM AFL

AIG

AON TMK HUM HNT

CI

C

PNC BK WFC NYB STT

MI

JPM AXP BEN
EV

BBT

AMTD

PBCT

SEIC

BAC

LM

RF

FITB

SLM

UNP

HBAN

LUK

CMA

FNM

NTRS

FRE

STI

WRB

MTB

PGR

SNV

CB

ZION

ALL

HCBK

CNA

TROW

L

SCHW

LNC

MS

MBI

ETFC

CINF

GS

HIG CVH MMCUNM AFL

AIG

AON TMK HUM HNT

CI

Created with NodeXL (http://nodexl.codeplex.com)

C

PNC BK WFC NYB STT

MI

JPM AXP BEN
EV

BBT

AMTD

PBCT

SEIC

BAC

LM

RF

FITB

SLM

UNP

HBAN

LUK

CMA

FNM

NTRS

FRE

STI

WRB

MTB

PGR

SNV

CB

ZION

ALL

HCBK

CNA

TROW

L

SCHW

LNC

MS

MBI

ETFC

CINF

GS

HIG CVHMMCUNM AFL

AIG

AON TMK HUM HNT

CI

Created with NodeXL (http://nodexl.codeplex.com)

C

PNC BK WFC NYB STT

MI

JPM AXP BEN
EV

BBT

AMTD

PBCT

SEIC

BAC

LM

RF

FITB

SLM

UNP

HBAN

LUK

CMA

FNM

NTRS

FRE

STI

WRB

MTB

PGR

SNV

CB

ZION

ALL

HCBK

CNA

TROW

L

SCHW

LNC

MS

MBI

ETFC

CINF

GS

HIG CVH MMCUNM AFL

AIG

AON TMK HUM HNT

CI

Created with NodeXL (http://nodexl.codeplex.com)

48

Figure 7: Network graph arranged according to industry groups highlighting the industry-specific risk spillovers from depositories (top left), insurances (top right), broker dealers (bottom left) and others (bottom right). Arrows only mark risk spillovers effects without referring to their respective size. Otherwise arrows and colors are as defined in Figure 1. A complete list of firms' acronyms is contained in Table 1 in the Appendix.

AIG: Systemic risk beta

0.20

beta.t -0.10 0.00 0.10

2000

2002

2004 Time
AIG: VaR

2006

2008

0.35

VaR.t 0.15 0.25

0.05

2000

2002

2004 Time

2006

AIG: Realized systemic risk beta

2008

beta.t*VaR.t*100 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3

2000

2002

2004 Time
Systemic risk beta

2006

2008

beta.t 0.00 0.10 0.20 0.30

2000

2002

2004 Time
BAC: VaR

2006

2008

VaR.t 0.3 0.5

0.1

2000

2002

2004 Time

2006

2008

BAC: Realized systemic risk beta

beta.t*VaR.t*100 246

0

2000

2002

2004 Time

2006

2008

Figure 8: The upper three panels depict time-varying systemic risk beta's, time-varying VaRs and the product of the two, realized systemic risk beta's, for American International Group (AIG). The lower three panels show the respective three time series for Bank of America (BAC).

49

Systemic Risk Impact of LEH &ML before the Crisis

0.04

0.03

0.02

Realized systemic risk betas

0.01

0.00

-0.01

2000

2002

2004 Time (year.month)

2006

Figure 9: Realized systemic risk betas, i.e., the products of estimated systemic risk betas and individual VaRs, of Lehman Brothers (LEH, red) and Merrill Lynch (ML, green). Estimation period is the pre-crisis period, 2000 - mid 2007.

VaR: Lehman Brothers

0.25

0.15

VaR.t

0.05

2000

2002

2004 Time

VaR: Merrill Lynch

2006

VaR.t 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08

2000

2002

2004 Time

2006

Figure 10: Estimated company-specific VaRs of Lehman Brothers (upper panel) and Merrill Lynch (lower panel). Estimation period is the pre-crisis period, 2000 - mid 2007.

50

References
Acharya, Viral V., Lasse H. Pedersen, Thomas Philippon, and Matthew Richardson, 2010, Measuring Systemic Risk, Working Paper.
Adrian, Tobias, and Markus K. Brunnermeier, 2011, CoVaR, Working Paper, Princeton University. Allen, F., and D. Gale, 2000, Financial Contagion, Journal of Political Economy 108, 1 ­ 33. Angrist, J., V. Chernozhukov, and I. Fernández-Val, 2006, Quantile regression under misspecifi-
cation, with an application to the US wage structure, Econometrica 74, 539 ­ 563. Belloni, A., and V. Chernozhukov, 2011, l1-penalized quantile regression in high-dimensional
sparse models, The Annals of Statistics 39, 82­130. Berkhin, P., 2005, A Survey on PageRank Computing, Internet Mathematics 2, 73­120. Berkowitz, Jeremy, Peter Christoffersen, and Denis Pelletier, 2009, Evaluating Value-at-Risk
Models with Desk-Level Data, Management Science, forthcoming. Bernanke, B., 2009, Financial Reform to Address Systemic Risk, Working paper, Speech at the
Council on Foreign Relations. Boss, M., H. Elsinger, M. Summer, and S. Thurner, 2004, Network Topology of the Interbank
Market, Quantitative Finance 4, 677­684. Brin, S., and L. Page, 1998, The Anatomy of a Large-Scale Hypertextual Web Search Engine,
Computer Networks and ISDN Systems 3, 107­117. Brownlees, C. T., and R. F. Engle, 2011, Volatility, Correlation and Tails for Systemic Risk Mea-
surement, Working Paper, Stern School Business, New York University. Brunnermeier, M., 2009, Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007-08, Journal of Eco-
nomic Perspectives 23, 77­100. Chen, K., Z. Ying, H. Zhang, and L. Zhao, 2008, Analysis of least absolute deviation, Biometrika
pp. 107­122. Cocco, J., F. Gomes, and N. Martins, 2009, Lending relationships in the interbank market, Journal
of Financial Intermediation 18, 24­48.
51

Degryse, H., and G. Nguyen, 2007, Interbank exposures: An empirical examination of systemic risk in the Belgian banking system, International Journal of Central Banking 3, 951­979.
Elsinger, Helmut, Alfred Lehar, and Martin Summer, 2006, Risk Assessment for Banking Systems, Management Science 9, 1301­1314.
Engle, Robert F., and Simone Manganelli, 2004, CAViaR: Conditional Autoregressive Value at Risk by Regression Quantiles, Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 22, 367­381.
Federal Reserve System, Board of Governors, 2009, The Supervisory Capital Assessment Program: Overview of Results, .
Freixas, X., B. Parigi, and J. C. Rochet, 2000, Systemic Risk, Interbank Relations, and Liquidity Provision by the Central Bank, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 32, 611­638.
Friedman, N., D. Geiger, and M. Goldszmidt, 1997, Bayesian network classifiers, Machine learning 29, 131­163.
Furfine, Craig H., 2003, Interbank Exposures: Quantifying the Risk of Contagion, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 35, 111­128.
Garcia, R., É. Renault, and G. Tsafack, 2007, Proper Conditioning for Coherent VaR in Portfolio Management, Management Science 53, 483­494.
Giesecke, K., and B. Kim, 2011, Systemic risk: What defaults are telling us, Management Science, forthcoming.
Iyer, Rajkamal, and José-Luis Peydrió, 2011, Interbank Contagion at Work: Evidence from a Natural Experiment, Review of Financial Studies 24, 1337­1377.
Koenker, Roger, and Gilbert Bassett, 1978, Regression Quantiles, Econometrica 46, 33­50. Koenker, Roger, and Gilbert Bassett, 1982, Tests of Linear Hypotheses and l1 Estimation, Econo-
metrica 50, 1577­1584.
Koopman, S. J., A. Lucas, and B. Schwaab, 2011, Modeling frailty correlated defaults using many macroeconomic covariates, Journal of Econometrics 162, 312­325.
Kuester, Keith, Stefan Mittnik, and Marc S. Paolella, 2006, Value-at-Risk Prediction: A Comparison of Alternative Strategies, Journal of Financial Econometrics 4, 53­89.
52

Kupiec, P., 1995, Techniques for Verifying the Accuracy of Risk Management Models, Journal of Derivatives 3, 73­84.
Lahiri, S.N., 2001, Effects of block lengths on the validity of block resampling methods, Probability Theory and Related Fields 121.
Leitner, Y., 2005, Financial Networks: Contagion, Commitments and Private Sector Bailouts, Journal of Finance 60, 2925­2953.
Powell, James L., 1983, The asymptotic normality of two-stage least absolute deviations estimators, Econometrica 51, 1569­1575.
Rajan, R.G., 2009, Too systemic to fail: consequences, causes and potential remedies, Working paper, Written statement to the Senate Banking Committee Hearings.
Schich, Sebastian, 2009, Insurance Companies and the Financial Crisis, OECD Journal: Fincial Market Trends 2009.
Schwaab, B., S. J. Koopman, and Andre Lucas, 2011, Systemic risk diagnostics: coincident indicators and early warning signals, Working Paper.
Segoviano, M., and C. Goodhart, 2009, Banking Stability Measures, Working Paper 09/04, International Monetary Fund.
Taylor, James W., 2008, Using Exponentially Weighted Quantile Regression to Estimate Value at Risk and Expected Shortfall, Journal of Financial Econometrics 6, 382­406.
Tibshirani, R., 1996, Regression Shrinkage and Selection via the Lasso, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B 58, 267­288.
Upper, C., and A. Worms, 2004, Estimating bilateral exposures in the German interbank market: Is there a danger of contagion?, European Economic Review 48, 827 ­ 849.
White, Halbert, Tae-Hwan Kim, and Simone Manganelli, 2010, VAR for VaR: Measuring systemic risk by multivariate regression quantiles, mimeo, ECB.
Zhou, C., 2009, Are banks too big to fail?, DNB Working Paper 232-2009, De Nederlandsche Bank.
53

SFB 649 Discussion Paper Series 2012
For a complete list of Discussion Papers published by the SFB 649, please visit http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de.
001 "HMM in dynamic HAC models" by Wolfgang Karl Härdle, Ostap Okhrin and Weining Wang, January 2012.
002 "Dynamic Activity Analysis Model Based Win-Win Development Forecasting Under the Environmental Regulation in China" by Shiyi Chen and Wolfgang Karl Härdle, January 2012.
003 "A Donsker Theorem for Lévy Measures" by Richard Nickl and Markus Reiß, January 2012.
004 "Computational Statistics (Journal)" by Wolfgang Karl Härdle, Yuichi Mori and Jürgen Symanzik, January 2012.
005 "Implementing quotas in university admissions: An experimental analysis" by Sebastian Braun, Nadja Dwenger, Dorothea Kübler and Alexander Westkamp, January 2012.
006 "Quantile Regression in Risk Calibration" by Shih-Kang Chao, Wolfgang Karl Härdle and Weining Wang, January 2012.
007 "Total Work and Gender: Facts and Possible Explanations" by Michael Burda, Daniel S. Hamermesh and Philippe Weil, February 2012.
008 "Does Basel II Pillar 3 Risk Exposure Data help to Identify Risky Banks?" by Ralf Sabiwalsky, February 2012.
009 "Comparability Effects of Mandatory IFRS Adoption" by Stefano Cascino and Joachim Gassen, February 2012.
010 "Fair Value Reclassifications of Financial Assets during the Financial Crisis" by Jannis Bischof, Ulf Brüggemann and Holger Daske, February 2012.
011 "Intended and unintended consequences of mandatory IFRS adoption: A review of extant evidence and suggestions for future research" by Ulf Brüggemann, Jörg-Markus Hitz and Thorsten Sellhorn, February 2012.
012 "Confidence sets in nonparametric calibration of exponential Lévy models" by Jakob Söhl, February 2012.
013 "The Polarization of Employment in German Local Labor Markets" by Charlotte Senftleben and Hanna Wielandt, February 2012.
014 "On the Dark Side of the Market: Identifying and Analyzing Hidden Order Placements" by Nikolaus Hautsch and Ruihong Huang, February 2012.
015 "Existence and Uniqueness of Perturbation Solutions to DSGE Models" by Hong Lan and Alexander Meyer-Gohde, February 2012.
016 "Nonparametric adaptive estimation of linear functionals for low frequency observed Lévy processes" by Johanna Kappus, February 2012.
017 "Option calibration of exponential Lévy models: Implementation and empirical results" by Jakob Söhl und Mathias Trabs, February 2012.
018 "Managerial Overconfidence and Corporate Risk Management" by Tim R. Adam, Chitru S. Fernando and Evgenia Golubeva, February 2012.
019 "Why Do Firms Engage in Selective Hedging?" by Tim R. Adam, Chitru S. Fernando and Jesus M. Salas, February 2012.
020 "A Slab in the Face: Building Quality and Neighborhood Effects" by Rainer Schulz and Martin Wersing, February 2012.
021 "A Strategy Perspective on the Performance Relevance of the CFO" by Andreas Venus and Andreas Engelen, February 2012.
022 "Assessing the Anchoring of Inflation Expectations" by Till Strohsal and Lars Winkelmann, February 2012.
SFB 649, Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

SFB 649 Discussion Paper Series 2012
For a complete list of Discussion Papers published by the SFB 649, please visit http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de.
023 "Hidden Liquidity: Determinants and Impact" by Gökhan Cebiroglu and Ulrich Horst, March 2012.
024 "Bye Bye, G.I. - The Impact of the U.S. Military Drawdown on Local German Labor Markets" by Jan Peter aus dem Moore and Alexandra Spitz-Oener, March 2012.
025 "Is socially responsible investing just screening? Evidence from mutual funds" by Markus Hirschberger, Ralph E. Steuer, Sebastian Utz and Maximilian Wimmer, March 2012.
026 "Explaining regional unemployment differences in Germany: a spatial panel data analysis" by Franziska Lottmann, March 2012.
027 "Forecast based Pricing of Weather Derivatives" by Wolfgang Karl Härdle, Brenda López-Cabrera and Matthias Ritter, March 2012.
028 "Does umbrella branding really work? Investigating cross-category brand loyalty" by Nadja Silberhorn and Lutz Hildebrandt, April 2012.
029 "Statistical Modelling of Temperature Risk" by Zografia Anastasiadou, and Brenda López-Cabrera, April 2012.
030 "Support Vector Machines with Evolutionary Feature Selection for Default Prediction" by Wolfgang Karl Härdle, Dedy Dwi Prastyo and Christian Hafner, April 2012.
031 "Local Adaptive Multiplicative Error Models for High-Frequency Forecasts" by Wolfgang Karl Härdle, Nikolaus Hautsch and Andrija Mihoci, April 2012.
032 "Copula Dynamics in CDOs." by Barbara Choro-Tomczyk, Wolfgang Karl Härdle and Ludger Overbeck, May 2012.
033 "Simultaneous Statistical Inference in Dynamic Factor Models" by Thorsten Dickhaus, May 2012.
034 "Realized Copula" by Matthias R. Fengler and Ostap Okhrin, Mai 2012. 035 "Correlated Trades and Herd Behavior in the Stock Market" by Simon
Jurkatis, Stephanie Kremer and Dieter Nautz, May 2012 036 "Hierarchical Archimedean Copulae: The HAC Package" by Ostap Okhrin
and Alexander Ristig, May 2012. 037 "Do Japanese Stock Prices Reflect Macro Fundamentals?" by Wenjuan
Chen and Anton Velinov, May 2012. 038 "The Aging Investor: Insights from Neuroeconomics" by Peter N. C. Mohr
and Hauke R. Heekeren, May 2012. 039 "Volatility of price indices for heterogeneous goods" by Fabian Y.R.P.
Bocart and Christian M. Hafner, May 2012. 040 "Location, location, location: Extracting location value from house
prices" by Jens Kolbe, Rainer Schulz, Martin Wersing and Axel Werwatz, May 2012. 041 "Multiple point hypothesis test problems and effective numbers of tests" by Thorsten Dickhaus and Jens Stange, June 2012 042 "Generated Covariates in Nonparametric Estimation: A Short Review." by Enno Mammen, Christoph Rothe, and Melanie Schienle, June 2012. 043 "The Signal of Volatility" by Till Strohsal and Enzo Weber, June 2012. 044 "Copula-Based Dynamic Conditional Correlation Multiplicative Error Processes" by Taras Bodnar and Nikolaus Hautsch, July 2012
SFB 649, Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

SFB 649 Discussion Paper Series 2012
For a complete list of Discussion Papers published by the SFB 649, please visit http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de.
045 "Additive Models: Extensions and Related Models." by Enno Mammen, Byeong U. Park and Melanie Schienle, July 2012.
046 "A uniform central limit theorem and efficiency for deconvolution estimators" by Jakob Söhl and Mathias Trabs, July 2012
047 "Nonparametric Kernel Density Estimation Near the Boundary" by Peter Malec and Melanie Schienle, August 2012
048 "Yield Curve Modeling and Forecasting using Semiparametric Factor Dynamics" by Wolfgang Karl Härdle and Piotr Majer, August 2012
049 "Simultaneous test procedures in terms of p-value copulae" by Thorsten Dickhaus and Jakob Gierl, August 2012
050 "Do Natural Resource Sectors Rely Less on External Finance than Manufacturing Sectors? " by Christian Hattendorff, August 2012
051 "Using transfer entropy to measure information flows between financial markets" by Thomas Dimpfl and Franziska J. Peter, August 2012
052 "Rethinking stock market integration: Globalization, valuation and convergence" by Pui Sun Tam and Pui I Tam, August 2012
053 "Financial Network Systemic Risk Contributions" by Nikolaus Hautsch, Julia Schaumburg and Melanie Schienle, August 2012
SFB 649, Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

