BERLIN

SFB 6 4 9 E C O N O M I C R I S K

SFB 649 Discussion Paper 2014-024
Peer Effects and Students' Self-Control
Berno Buechel* Lydia Mechtenberg*
Julia Petersen*
* Universität Hamburg, Germany
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".
http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de ISSN 1860-5664
SFB 649, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin

Peer Effects and Students' Self-Control
Berno Buechela, Lydia Mechtenberga,*, and Julia Petersena
aDepartment of Economics, University of Hamburg
March 26, 2014
Abstract We conducted a multi-wave field experiment to study the interaction of peer effects and selfcontrol among undergraduate students. We use a behavioral measure of self-control based on whether students achieve study related goals they have set for themselves. We find that both self-control and the number of talented friends increase students' performance. We then set out to test the theoretical prediction of Battaglini, Bénabou and Tirole (2005) that (only) sufficiently self-controlled individuals profit from interactions with peers. We find that peers with high self-control are more likely to connect to others, have a higher overall number of friends and have a higher number of talented friends. Moreover, positive news about self-controlled behavior of their peers increases students' own perseverance. Hence, our findings are consistent with the model of Battaglini, Bénabou and Tirole. In addition, we find that female students are more likely to have high self-control, but do not outperform male students. One reason for this is that female students have a lower number of talented friends than their male counterparts, thereby profiting less from positive peer effects.
Keywords: Self-control; Peer Influence; Social Networks; Goals; Time preferences; Procrastination; Willpower; School Performance; Experiment
JEL-Classification: C93; D85; I21; J24 _________________________
* Corresponding Author. University of Hamburg, Department of Economics, Von-Melle-Park 5, 20148 Hamburg, Germany. Email: lydia.mechtenberg@wiso.uni-hamburg.de, Tel.: +49-30-25491-446. Financial support by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) through CRC 649 "Economic Risk" is gratefully acknowledged. Moreover, we are grateful for financial support by the Institute of Advanced Studies in Toulouse, IAST.
1

1 Introduction
Successful performance, be it in school or at university, at the job or in leisure activities, depends both on persistence in what one is doing and on knowledge about how it is to be done. Persistence requires self-control, i.e., the ability to resist temptations to procrastinate; while knowledge of how to best achieve a goal can be acquired from more advanced peers. How self-control ­ or the lack thereof ­ can influence behavior and finally performance is studied by the literature on present-biased preferences1; whereas a mostly empirical literature on peer effects investigates how an individual's achievement depends on her relation to her peers.2 We contribute to both strands of the literature by providing the first experimental study on how peer effects in social networks interact with individual selfcontrol. Combining a field experiment with surveys, we show that more self-controlled students are better connected to their peers, have better access to highly talented peers and write better exam grades than students with low self-control.
Present-biased preferences lead to self-control problems that affect performance: For instance, a student might want to study hard in the evening in order to be well prepared for class the next day. However, when evening actually arrives, the now immediate psychological costs from studying become much more salient than the still relatively far-away benefit from being well prepared, and the student is severely tempted to go out instead. More generally, if a disproportionally high weight is attached to whatever costs or benefits would accrue immediately, then plans implying that investments precede benefits will be likely to fail due to the temptation to avoid immediate costs. Since performance plans typically are of this kind, a present bias can impede performance.
But performance also depends on the interaction with peers: Peers with high levels of human capital can improve the performance of their friends in multiple ways, for instance, by intentionally or unintentionally providing them with important information or acting as a role model. Importantly, individual self-control might mediate the access to peers with high levels of human capital. For instance, if connecting to peers and maintaining these links in the long run requires self-control, or if only sufficiently self-controlled individuals can profit from
1 For theoretical contributions see, e.g., Strotz (1955), Thaler and Shefrin (1981), Ainslie and Haslam (1992), Laibson (1997), O'Donoghue and Rabin (1999), Gul and Pesendorfer (2001), Bénabou and Pycia (2002), and Fudenberg and Levine (2006). Recent experimental contributions on time preferences include Ariely and Wertenbroch (2002), Andersen et al. (2008), Benhabib, Bisin and Schotter (2008) and Andreoni and Sprenger (2012). 2 See, e.g. Hoxby (2000), Hoxby and Weingarth (2005), Zimmerman (2003), Falk and Ichino (2006), Mas and Moretti (2009), and Calvo-Armengol, Patacchini and Zenou (2009). The latter combines theory and empirics to investigate peer effects in an educational setting.
2

friends with high levels of human capital, then self-control will not only have a direct but also an indirect effect on performance that is mediated by peer effects.
Despite this rather obvious possibility, the literatures on self-control and peer effects have hitherto remained separated. One notable exception is the contribution of Battaglini, Bénabou and Tirole (2005). Their theory of peer effects on self-control provides us with our main hypotheses. In their model, individuals have imperfect knowledge about their own selfcontrol, but know that levels of self-control are positively correlated within their peer group. Hence, observing how peers react to temptations provides individuals with additional information about their own level of self-control. This, in turn, affects their self-confidence and consequently the degree to which they themselves exhibit self-controlled behavior in the future. Intuitively, observing how peers can handle similar challenges to their willpower can be encouraging or discouraging ("if he can do it, then so can I" or "if not even he can do it, then I do not even have to try"). The theory of Battaglini, Bénabou and Tirole (2005) can explain the existence and workings of self-help groups, but also applies more broadly, including our context of students' learning groups. In our field experiment, we elicit both the individual self-control and the social network of our students and provide them with information about the self-control of some of their peers. Our findings are consistent with the theory provided by Battaglini, Bénabou and Tirole (2005). In particular, we find evidence for their prediction that individuals with low self-control remain unconnected to their peers while individuals with sufficiently high self-control connect to them. In addition, we find that connectedness improves performance, which is in line with both the theory and the empirical results of Calvó-Armengol, Patacchini and Zenou (2009). Specifically, we find that it is connectedness to talented friends that matters in improving performance.
The existing empirical and experimental literature on self-control has so far mainly studied the ­ direct ­ relation between self-control and performance. In a field experiment with students, Wong (2008) finds that time-consistent behavior in midterm preparation is positively correlated with students' performance. Bucciol, Houser and Piovesan (2011) find that consumption temptations are detrimental for the performance of younger children but leaves the performance of older children unchanged. Empirical evidence for negative effects of self-control problems on various important outcomes is provided by DellaVigna and Malmendier (2006), Ashraf, Karlan and Yin (2006) and Ameriks et al. (2007). We contribute to this literature in two ways. First, we confirm its general finding that self-control enhances performance. Second, and more importantly, we provide evidence for an indirect relation between self-control and performance which is mediated by connectedness to talented peers.
3

Our paper is also related to a literature that has studied whether commitment devices can help overcome self-control problems. Ariely and Wertenbroch (2002) study the effect of self-imposed and externally-imposed deadlines on performance in another field experiment. They show that both (evenly-spaced) externally-imposed and self-imposed deadlines have a positive effect on performance. However, as Burger, Charness and Lynham (2011) find in a related field experiment, externally-imposed deadlines do not always increase performance. Houser et al. (2010) conducted a laboratory experiment to elicit individuals' willingness to pay for commitment in a game in which the participants repeatedly face temptations. The authors find that the average willingness to pay is positive and the choice of whether or not to buy commitment depends on the costs of the commitment device in question. Our contribution to this literature is mainly methodological and consists in the way we construct our behavioral measure of self-control: We categorize those individuals as possessing high levels of self-control who stick to their self-imposed deadlines and who, after buying costly partial commitment, do not violate it afterwards. In particular, students are classified as exhibiting low self-control if they do not manage to hand in their midterm homework before a non-binding deadline they had chosen at the beginning of the semester, or if they missed out a micro workshop in which they had previously enrolled. To our knowledge, we are the first to combine within one study the experimental measurement of self-control with the measurement of subjects' social network.
The empirical literature on peer effects has proposed different methods to solve the standard identification problems as outlined by Manski (1993). Possible approaches to overcome these problems include random assignment to a group or to a treatment, the use of non-linear models or network models. All approaches incorporate the assumption that an individual's outcome is determined by the mean outcome and characteristics of her peers.3 Recent studies that find a positive relation between being observed by peers and individual performance are, e.g., Falk and Ichino (2006) and Mas and Moretti (2009). By contrast, our focus is not on how observability by peers affects performance. Rather, we study how observing peers, in particular their self-control, affects individual goal-setting.4 We find that goals are increasing in observed self-control of peers.
While our main focus is on self-control and peer effects, we also contribute to the experimental literature on gender differences. Surprisingly, we find that women profit less
3 Three notable exceptions are the empirical study of Calvó-Armengol, Patacchini and Zenou (2009), the field experiment by Falk and Ichino (2006) and the natural experiment by Sacerdote (2001). 4 For a theoretical approach on how commitment or goals can improve self-control, see, e.g., Bryan, Karlan and Nelson (2010), Koch and Nafziger (2011), Suvorov and Van de Ven (2008) and Noor (2011).
4

from positive peer effects than men with comparable levels of human capital: Although women have more self-control than men, they do not outperform the latter.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In section 2, we derive our hypotheses, mainly referring to the theory provided by Battaglini, Bénabou and Tirole (2005). Section 3 reports our experimental design and section 4 our main results, including our findings on the relation between the social network characteristics of (male and female) students and peer effects on performance. In section 5, we first describe our experimental intervention by which we inform students about highly self-controlled behavior of their peers and then report the results. We discuss our findings and conclude in section 6.
2 Hypotheses
Individuals who achieve their goals are typically more self-controlled than those who set the same goals but fail to achieve them. We use this insight to implement a behavioral measure of self-control in our experiment. In theory, individuals learn from their experience and adjust their goal-setting behavior to their perceived level of self-control.5 Consequently, a behavioral measure of self-control can best be obtained from goal achievement at early stages of this learning process, i.e., from observing how well individuals not yet fully informed about their own self-control relate to their early goals. Hence, we (behaviorally) equate high self-control with a high level of early goal achievement.
We are now in a position to formulate our first two hypotheses:
H1 Performance increases in self-control, i.e., in early goal achievement. H2 Individuals with high self-control invest more effort into achieving their goals
than individuals with low self-control.
Our main question is how self-control interacts with one's position in a social network and thereby with standard peer effects. The only existing theory that addresses this question is provided by Battaglini, Bénabou and Tirole (2005), henceforth BBT. Their results show that only sufficiently self-controlled individuals profit from the interaction with peers; but they profit more from peers who are similar to them in terms of self-control. When individuals can anticipate the benefits that arise from forming connections (cf. Jackson and Wolinsky, 1996), two testable predictions of the BBT model are, first, that only sufficiently self-controlled
5 For a theory on learning self-control in a dynamic setting, see Ali (2011). 5

individuals have a strictly positive number of links to others, and, second, that self-control is correlated among direct friends.
The BBT model does not account for human capital. However, it is easy to see how an extended reasoning along its lines can be used to bridge the gap between the literature on selfcontrol and the literature on how human capital of peers can affect achievement: Since selfcontrolled people tend to persist in their performance plans, they tend to acquire more human capital. Consequently, they become more valuable peers with regard to the peer effects on achievement that can be expected from them. If indeed only sufficiently self-controlled individuals connect with others, as the BBT model suggests, then only sufficiently selfcontrolled individuals will enjoy positive peer effects on their performance. Hence, we hypothesize:
H3 Performance increases in the number of talented friends. H4 People with high self-control (a) are more likely to connect to others, (b) have
a higher overall number of friends, and (c) have a higher number of talented friends.
If we look deeper into the BBT model, an even subtler way emerges in which individual self-control and connections to peers affect each other: Not only does self-control affect the individuals' social network (and thereby their access to positive peer effects on performance); but it does so because peers also affect self-control itself. Individuals profit from good news about the self-control of their peers: By increasing their prior about their own ability to retain self-control, observable self-controlled behavior of their peers increases individuals' effort to resist temptations. By contrast, bad news about their peers' self-control harms individuals by decreasing their confidence in their own ability to resist temptations, making them more likely to give in. For ethical reasons, we can only test the good-news prediction. In particular, we hypothesize that effort is increasing in the revealed effort of peers. Besides actual effort, also planned effort can be considered since goal-setting is one way to invest into self-control. Thus, we additionally conjecture that good news about the self-control of one's peers increases self-set goals while bad news lowers them. Our last hypothesis is:
H5 Planned effort (a self-set goal) and actual effort both increase in revealed effort of peers.
6

3 Experimental Design and Implementation
3.1 Experimental Procedure
We conducted our experiment in an undergraduate microeconomics course at the University of Hamburg in the summer semester of 2013.6 In total, 117 first-year students regularly participated in the lecture and the tutorials.
Our experiment was conducted in the following five waves: 1. Survey on aspired course grades and current study time 2. Survey on intermediate goals and partial communication of others' study time per week 3. Measurement of intermediate goal achievement 4. Elicitation of students' social network and preferences 5. Exam
In the first two waves, we conducted surveys and implemented one experimental intervention in the tutorial classes. In the fourth wave, we conducted a paper-and-pencil experiment and the final survey in the lecture class. Students could never anticipate upcoming waves, and they were not told before the beginning of the fourth wave that they were part of an experiment. Rather, they were told that some faculty wanted to analyze students' learning conditions and study behavior. Moreover, the experimenters who actually entered classes were not involved in teaching the lecture or tutorial courses.7 The teaching assistants were informed about who would enter their classes on which days and were told that the interventions they witnessed were part of a study on student behavior.8 They have never been informed about the fourth wave of the experiment or about the purpose of the first three waves before the end of the semester. Furthermore, they were instructed not to provide possible interpretations of our study to the students. Apparently students accepted our
6 In Hamburg, like in most German cities, courses in the summer semester are taught from beginning of April to mid July. 7 The experimental team that actually entered the classes to conduct the experiment consisted of two of the three authors of this paper. The third author, Lydia Mechtenberg, committed both not to act as an experimenter in class and not to receive the data set in a non-anonymized form, since she was the lecturer of the microeconomics course. Exams were graded by the teaching assistants who did not know the purpose of the study and never received access to the data set. 8 In the second wave, they announced the modalities of handing in the mid-term problem set as a natural part of their teaching job. These modalities were designed for experimental purposes about which, however, the teaching assistants were not informed.
7

explanation of the interventions in their classes and never approached an experimenter or

teaching assistant on this issue. All material used for the experimental interventions and surveys is collected in Appendix B.9

The first wave

In the first wave, we conducted a survey in each tutorial, asking

which grades students aspired to and how many minutes they on average studied per week for

this specific course.

The second wave The second wave was mainly dedicated to induce students to set

goals for themselves at a relatively early stage of the course, since their behavior with respect to these goals allows us to measure students' self-control at a later point in time. This wave

consists of three steps which were conducted in the tutorials. Each teaching assistant

announced that several organizational issues were to be settled within the ongoing session of

the tutorial course. 1st step: Planned effort

We confronted students with a signal about the maximal

time a peer in their tutorial has studied (the details of this intervention are described in section

5.1) and asked in a survey how much students planned to study per week for this course in the

future. Hence, we elicited individual self-set goals. 2nd step: Intermediate goal with partial commitment

Next, a senior student who

was not informed about the purpose or content of our study entered the tutorial course and

truthfully explained to the students that they could enroll in a non-compulsory one-day micro

workshop. Moreover, he mentioned that enrolment was not obligatory for participants but that

each student who, though enrolled, would not show up for the workshop would have to pay a

fee of 3 EUR. By contrast, participation, both with and without enrolment, was free of charge. It was also made clear that payment of the fee would be asserted.10 Hence, students were

offered a pre-designed goal (participating in the workshop) together with a commitment

device (the fee). Then, the senior student distributed enrolment forms that again mentioned

the fee and provided the link to a website where online enrolment for the workshop was

possible. Finally, he collected the enrolment forms and left the class. 3rd step: Intermediate goal without commitment The teaching assistant truthfully

explained to his students that they had to submit a compulsory midterm assignment in order to be eligible for the final exam. This assignment ­ a standard problem set ­ was identical for all

students. The quality of the solution was not decisive for students' admission to the final

9 The material was originally written in German. In Appendix B, we collect the English translations. Format and
design of the original material are preserved. 10In fact, teaching assistants and the experimental team collected the fee within the three weeks after the
workshop and, if necessary, immediately after the exam.
8

exam; but their solution had to fulfill the minimum requirement of being a recognizable attempt to solve all problems of the problem set. The teaching assistant explained to his students that they had to choose between two submission deadlines, an early and a late one, which were neutrally framed. He distributed forms on which the two deadlines were specified and the students were asked to individually choose their preferred deadline. Hence, students were offered the possibility of regulating their own future learning behavior by choosing the goal of submitting early. Students were told that their choice was not binding but helpful for organizational purposes. They were also told that assignments handed in after the late deadline would not be considered and excluded the students from the possibility of taking the exam. This information was provided online, too, and was repeated several times in the lecture to make sure that all students enrolled would understand it. To provide a (weak) incentive for students to choose the early deadline, online feedback about the quality of their solution of the midterm assignment was promised to students who submitted prior to the early deadline. No feedback was provided to students who submitted prior to the late but after the early deadline. However, any category of students always had the opportunity to approach their teaching assistant after the tutorials or during the office hours to get any information about any exercise they needed help with. In addition, we instructed the teaching assistants not to provide the correct solutions of the midterm assignments in their online feedback. The online feedback did not provide any real advantage to the students who received it.
The third wave The organizing team of the workshop collected the data about students' enrolments and their actual participation and passed them on to the experimental team. The workshop took place on a weekend day after the third wave of the experiment. In its course, additional exercises related to the content of the micro course and prepared by the organizing team were discussed. The teaching assistants collected all data about students' choices of a submission deadline and registered whether students' actually submitted before the chosen deadline. Again, all data were passed on to the experimental team.
The fourth wave The main purpose of the fourth wave was to elicit students' networks. We conducted a final survey in which students were asked to name the peers with whom they had joined to prepare themselves for the exam (outside the official lectures and tutorials). These lists of names allow us to reconstruct the social network of learning relationships within class.11 For each of the listed friends some further survey questions
11 Literally, the social network is directed because some students are mentioned by others who do not mention them. However, it seems more reasonable to consider learning relations as bilateral and to believe that two students have learned together even if only one of them reports this, e.g., because the other learning partner was absent on the day on which we conducted the final survey.
9

specified the kind of relationship, e.g., since when they know each other. We also asked how they perceived their own, their peers', and other students' degree of self-control.12 Moreover,

we elicited their risk preferences for different contexts (among others finance, job, leisure)

using the risk module initially implemented in the German Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP) in

2004 (see Wagner, Frick and Schupp 2007). Before the survey, students participated in a

paper-and-pencil experiment in which we elicited their time preferences in a context of

choices between small short-term payoffs and larger payoffs that would be paid out at more

far-away points in the future. To this purpose, we used ten incentivized decisions following

the non-parametric method recently introduced by Takeuchi (2011). All payoffs were paid out

by online delivery of Amazon vouchers.

The fifth wave

Students wrote the final exam either at the beginning or at the

end of the semester break. Thereby they could score between 0 and 90 points.13

3.2 Key Measures

Measuring performance, talent and effort

We use the score in the final exam to

measure performance, since it fully determines the overall course grades. We also obtained

the scores (and grades) from a previous math course as a control variable for talent since a

proficiency in math was important both for solving the preparatory problem sets and for doing

well in the exam. To account for effort, we use self-reported study times both from the first

and the fourth wave.

Measuring self-control We constructed an indicator variable, self control, that

measures whether a student behaved in a time-consistent way, i.e., achieved his own intermediate goals. A student's two intermediate goals are to submit the midterm assignment

prior to the deadline that she herself had previously chosen and to participate in the workshop

in case that she had registered for participation. Among the 63 students who signed up for the

micro workshop, a share of 73% (46 students) attended it. Early midterm assignment was

planned by 107 students, but only a share of 73% (78 students) actually delivered early. The

binary variable self control becomes one if the student both submitted prior to her self-chosen

deadline and did not fail to attend the workshop if enrolled. This variable captures self-control

well since it assigns low self-control to students who cannot resist the temptation to

procrastinate when preparing the midterm assignment or the temptation to spend their week-

12 Students reported their perceived degree of self-control on a scale between 0 and 10. 13 Students who failed to pass at the early date were automatically eligible to write a new version of the exam at
the end of the semester break.
10

end in a more agreeable way than by attending a workshop that they had planned to attend.14

The basic assumption underlying the construction of the indicator variable is that, as implied

by economic theory, the economic concept of self-control can be equated with time-consistent

behavior.

In order to test whether time-consistency is stable across different contexts, we used

the method introduced by Takeuchi (2011) to construct a second self-control variable which

measures individual time-preferences in the monetary context of our paper-and-pencil

experiment (fourth wave). Measuring students' social network position

We created two different variables:

friends and degree. The binary variable friends takes the value one if the student is at all

connected to others, i.e., is part of a study group, and zero otherwise. The variable degree counts the student's direct links to others, i.e. the number of learning partners.15 We computed

both variables from the undirected social network. In order to check for robustness of our

results we also use variables derived from the directed network. Differentiation of peers To further substantiate friends' peer effects we

categorize them as talented or untalented according to their math score. The count variable

talented friends counts the number of links to fellow students who have a math score weakly

above 58 points, while the count variable untalented friends counts the number of links to

fellow students who have a math score weakly below 55 points. The chosen threshold makes

use of the fact that no student achieved a math score between 55 and 58; and it splits all

friends in two categories of equal size.

Descriptive statistics of our most important variables are provided in Table 1.

4 Main Results

4.1 Determinants of Performance
Table 2 displays the results on how individual characteristics, including self-control, general
connectedness to other students and specific connectedness to highly talented students affect
performance. In all models, we tested for the presence of omitted variables with a
specification-error test as well as for multicollinearity and rejected both. Moreover, ordinary
least square (OLS) estimates were calculated with robust standard errors. We additionally
14 In principle, we can also construct two separate indicator variables for time-consistent behavior concerning each of the two intermediate goals. While many of our results are qualitatively unaffected, there is simply less variation in these two measures. 15 Further network statistics, such as measures of centrality, are difficult to interpret since the network is quite sparse, consisting of many isolates and small components.
11

used a two-step FGLS (feasible generalized least square) method to account for

heteroskedasticity and thus to gain efficiency.

Self-control and talent Both individual self-control and talent have a positive

effect on performance. Pairwise correlation of the dependent variable and these regressor

variables yields a correlation coefficient of 0.66 (with a p-value smaller than 0.001) for talent

and performance, while the correlation coefficient of self-control and performance is 0.30

(with a p-value of 0.003). The effect of talent is significant at the 1% level across all model

specifications. Self-control is statistically significant, albeit to a lesser degree. Being highly

self-controlled is associated roughly with an eight points higher micro score, which is

substantial since the maximal score is 90 and the median score is 58. The standard deviation

of math score is 21 (reported in Table 1); an increase of one standard deviation in math score

leads to a rise of 12 points in the micro score.

These results fully support our hypothesis H1 that self-control positively affects

performance. One important alternative suggestion would be that self control captures an

advantage in human capital of those students who attended the workshop and received

feedback after an early submission of their midterm assignment. To test whether this is true,

we conducted a Wilcoxon rank-sum test comparing the performance of those who attended

the workshop and received the feedback with those who did not. The result is displayed in

Table 3. There is no evidence that workshop attendance and feedback affected performance.

Hence, we can be confident that the positive coefficient of the variable self control in Table 2

does indeed measure a positive effect of actual self-control on performance.

Self-control and peer effects

The number of friends in general, measured by

degree, has no significant effect on performance when controlling for talent and self-control

(see columns 2 and 3 in Table 2). However, increasing the number of talented friends, i.e.,

friends with a high math score, significantly improves performance, which is fully in line with

our hypothesis H3. If we control for the number of talented friends, the effect of self-control

becomes weaker. Within the OLS regression the effect of self-control is of the same

dimension but insignificant. In the FGLS model, the effect of self-control remains significant

when controlling for the number of talented friends. Since overall model diagnostic statistics

favor the FGLS model, we conclude that both self-control and being connected to many

talented peers significantly improve performance. Overall, we find strong evidence in support

of our hypotheses H1 and H3.

Self-control and effort

One channel through which self-control might

affect performance is effort. However, performance does not seem to be affected by early

12

effort, i.e., by the average number of minutes studied per week, as reported in the first wave

of our experiment. On the other hand, late effort, i.e., the average number of minutes studied in the last week prior to the exam, seems to positively affect performance to some extent.16 However, this result is not robust to controlling for other covariates, like talent.17 Hence, we

conclude that we do not find strong evidence for a positive relationship between effort and

performance. This might be due to the fact that effort and talent can be substitutes as well as

complements, which might vary across students. Alternatively, learning methods, e.g., how

the material is structured and whether students acquire problem-solving skills rather than

memorize prespecified results, might matter more than the pure amount of time spent

studying.

Our hypothesis H2 predicts that effort is increasing in self-control such that more self-

controlled students would study more than their peers. On average, early effort of students

with low self-control amounts to 57 minutes per week, while students with high self-control study 78 minutes per week. However, this difference is not significant.18 By contrast, highly

self-controlled students invest significantly more effort in the week prior to the exam. Figure 2 displays kernel density estimates for late effort per level of self-control, i.e. students' effort

one week prior to the microeconomics exam, separated according to the level of self-control.

Indeed, highly self-controlled students seem to work harder in the week prior to the exam than

their less self-controlled counterparts. Specifically, median effort for highly (lowly) self-

controlled students is 240 (80) minutes per week; and average effort for highly (lowly) self-

controlled students is 290 (210) minutes per week. A Wilcoxon test rejects the hypothesis that

both groups are not statistically different with regard to late effort with a p-value of 0.078. In

sum, we find only weak support for our hypothesis H2. Self-control and monetary time-preferences

Considering the students'

monetary time preferences, we do not find any effect on performance or on any other

behavioral variable such as effort or goal-setting behavior. Importantly, we also do not find

any correlation between these time-preferences and our behavioral self-control measure.

Similarly to the data reported by Takeuchi (2011) whose method we adopted, most

participants appear to be future-biased in the monetary context, while only few seem to have a

present bias or to be time-consistent. At least in our setting, time preferences do not seem to

be correlated across the monetary context and the context of studying.

16 Results on the relationship between effort and performance are not reported in the tables. 17 Controlling for other covariates creates heteroskedasticity. We control for heteroskedasticity by applying the
bootstrapped method using 400 resamples. 18 This result is not reported in the tables.
13

4.2 The Interaction of Self-Control and Peer Effects

Self-control and students' social network

Figure 1 displays the social network of our

students and provides a first impression of the relationship between self-control and connectedness. Importantly, most students who have at least one friend also have a high level

of self-control, whereas the majority of those who are unconnected to any friends also exhibit

low self-control. To be more precise, only 39% of the many isolates have a high level of self-

control. In contrast, 71% of the students who have at least one friend also exhibit high selfcontrol. This observation already suggests that network formation among students could well

be fully in line with the BBT model, i.e., that only sufficiently self-controlled individuals

profit from teaming up with similarly self-controlled peers.

Figure 1: Students' learning network and their self-control. Light-green (dark-red) stands for a high (low) level of self-control. Circle (box) indicates a female (male) student.

To test this hypothesis we first consider the variable friends, i.e., the binary variable measuring whether a student is connected to any friends at all (friends = 1). Indeed, students with high self-control are much more likely to have connections to peers (Pearson Chi2 = 12.159 with p-value < 0.001 and Fisher's exact test yields p-value = 0.001).19 To control for other individual characteristics, we run a probit regression with friends as a dependent variable, using self-control and further individual characteristics as covariates. A Hosmer-

19 This result is not reported in the tables.

14

Lemeshow specification test shows that all the models are well specified. Table 4 displays the results. Self-control and talent both have a statistically significant positive impact on the likelihood of being connected in different model specifications. Indeed, the predicted probability of being connected is 21% higher for individuals with high self-control than for those with low self-control, holding all other covariates constant.
We also tested whether self-control tends to increase the number of friends a student is connected to. Since the dependent variable degree, the number of friends, is a nonnegative integer, we use Poisson and negative binomial models. Results are shown in Table 5. Since overdispersion is present, negative binomial models provide the best fit. Our results support our findings from the previous binary outcome model. Highly self-controlled students have a higher number of friends; and this effect is significant at the 5% level in both models. Specifically, a discrete change from having low self-control to having high self-control is associated with 0.64 additional friends. To check for robustness, we use the directed network and estimate the effect of self-control on outdegree and indegree, i.e. the number of friends a student nominated in the survey, respectively how often the student was nominated. Both measures from the directed network show a significant effect of similar size.20 Overall, our estimates consistently show that highly self-controlled students are more likely to have friends and also tend to have more friends than students with low self-control. This is clear evidence for parts (a) and (b) of our hypothesis H4.
To test whether highly self-controlled students are also more likely to have highly talented friends, we ran two Poisson regressions with talented friends and untalented friends as response variables. Since the equidispersion property is not violated, models fitting the Poisson distribution are used. Results are reported in column 1 of Table 6. On average, the number of highly talented friends is increasing in self-control. This effect is positive and statistically significant, which supports part (c) of our hypothesis H4. The size of the effect is also substantial: Being highly self-controlled is associated with 0.35 additional talented friends.
We also tested whether self-control affects the number of lowly talented friends, i.e., the number of friends with a low math score. As can be seen from the second column of Table 6, we do not find any effect of self-control on the number of lowly talented friends. Hence, while a highly self-controlled student is more likely than a student with low self-control to have friends at all, the former also seems to be more selective in choosing his or her friends than the latter. Since students with more talented friends perform better in the exam, these

20 These results are not reported in the tables.

15

results imply that self-control facilitates positive peer effects on performance: More selfcontrolled students have better access to highly talented peers and thereby accomplish more than their less well-connected peers. This is another channel through which self-control affects performance. Overall, we conclude that there is supportive evidence for all parts of our hypothesis H4 showing a strong link between a student's connectedness and her self-control. By contrast, we do not find any evidence in favor of our hypothesis H5, i.e., that self-control is correlated among direct friends. This, however, seems due to the fact that testing this hypothesis requires a dramatic reduction in sample size since a significant part of our students does not have any friends at all. Hence, we conclude that our results are sufficiently in line with the BBT model to provide support for it.
Note that a very specific prediction of the BBT model is the claim that only sufficiently self-controlled individuals profit from connecting to others at all. This prediction could not be generated by a theory of homophile network formation, other than the prediction that self-control be correlated among friends. Hence, since we validate the former claim, we provide evidence in support of the BBT model.
4.3 Gender Differences in Self-Control and Peer Effects
Since we conducted our field study in an educational setting where gender differences typically play an important role, we also investigate whether and how female students differ from male students in self-control, peer effects and performance.
Table 7 and Figure 3 display the results regarding self-control. Female students are significantly more self-controlled than their male counterparts: females' likelihood of being highly self-controlled is 37,5 % higher than males', holding the other covariates constant. Moreover, comparing the probabilities of being highly self-controlled between female and male students for different levels of talent, as we do in Figure 3, reveals, first, that the predicted values of being highly self-controlled are higher for female students for all levels of talent. Second, men's fitted probability of being highly self-controlled increases much more strongly in talent than women's, i.e. the men's slope is steeper. One possible explanation could be that women partly use self-control as a substitute for talent while men's self-control and talent are complements.
To test whether this notable advantage over their male peers gives female students a head-start in the exam, we conducted a Wilcoxon rank-sum test which is displayed in Table 3. Moreover, we controlled for gender when examining determinants of students' performance (see all model specifications in Table 2). As can be seen from both tables, our findings do not
16

indicate that women outperform men. If anything, men perform better than women. Hence, we conclude that the advantage of female students in terms of self-control must be counterbalanced by some disadvantage either in other determinants of performance or in the way in which self-control is used to increase performance. A second Wilcoxon rank-sum test which is displayed in Table 3 reveals that women seem to scribe somewhat lower math scores than men, but this is not significant. Hence, we cannot conclude that women have a disadvantage in talent. Regarding their social network, neither are female students significantly less likely to have friends, nor do numbers of friends differ significantly between the sexes, as can be seen from Tables 4 and 5. This is already an interesting observation, since one could expect the (more self-controlled) female students to be more likely than the male students to be connected to friends at all, given that self-control turned out to be an important determinant of connectedness. However, if we look deeper into the way in which female and male students form their social network, an interesting gender difference emerges that possibly counteracts the women's advantage in self-control: We find a compositional difference in how female and male students have formed their network. Female students seem less selective than male students in choosing their friends since there is a strong negative impact of being female on the number of talented friends which is significant at the 1% level (cf. Table 6). In particular, female students have 0.4 fewer highly talented friends compared to male students.
Hence, female students, although more self-controlled on average than male students, seem to use their self-control less efficiently to get access to highly talented peers and hence profit less from positive peer effects on performance.21 This might be at least one possible reason why women, albeit more self-controlled than men, do not outperform the latter in the exam.22
5 Self-Control and "Good News" about Peers
5.1 Experimental Intervention
In the BBT model, a specific mechanism makes sufficiently self-controlled individuals want to team up with peers who have similar levels of self-control. This mechanism is part of the
21 This finding seems to be very much in line with the empirical results of Lalanne and Seabright (2013) and the experimental findings of Friebel et al. (2013). Lalanne and Seabright (2013) find that the presence of influential individuals in a cohort of employees improves men's wages much more strongly than women's. Friebel et al. find that men's network formation is more reactive to short-term benefits (i.e., payoffs) than women's. 22 Obviously, there are other possible explanations, for example that women perform worse than equally talented men in competitive environments (see, e.g., Gneezy, Niederle and Rustichini (2003), Niederle and Vesterlund, (2007), and Jurajda and Münich (2011)).
17

so-called "good news" equilibrium: Individuals correctly expect to learn more often than not that their peers have resisted temptations. This increases their confidence in their own selfcontrol and finally enhances their future resistance against temptations. To address the question whether a similar cognitive mechanism makes our students appreciate highly selfcontrolled peers, we implemented an experimental intervention in the second wave of our study, where we communicate "good news" about their peers' self-control.
In each tutorial group, we informed the students about the current study time (elicited in wave 1) of the most hard-working peers within their tutorial. Since students with low ambitions might not respond to information about the effort of extremely ambitious students, we communicated two signals in each tutorial: the current study time of the most hardworking non-ambitious peer (low stimulus) and the current study time of the most hardworking ambitious peer (high stimulus), where students are categorized as ambitious if they aspired to a grade better or equal to 2.3.23 Thus, the variable stimulus assigns to each student the maximal early effort of the peer in the tutorial with the same ambition, which in each tutorial is lower for non-ambitious students than for ambitious students.
After receiving the stimulus, all students in the tutorial group were required to define how many minutes per week (on average) they planned to study from then on until the exam.24 We used this survey to test whether students' goal setting behavior (their planned effort) and their actual late effort depended on the stimulus. Those students whose early effort was used as stimulus are excluded from the analysis.
To see how this relates to theory, note that the stimulus provided to our students was "good news" about an anonymous peer in their group who studied harder than they did while exhibiting a similar ambition. Hence, the stimulus suggested that this peer was better than the others in the group in resisting the usual temptations that divert students from work. According to the BBT model, this good news should enhance a student's confidence in her own self-control and thereby her willingness to persevere. Hence, we conjectured that late effort increases in the stimulus, i.e., that students studied harder in the week prior to the exam if the student of their tutorial group whose early effort was used as stimulus had studied hard in the early weeks of the course. Moreover, note that according to Koch and Nafziger (2011), setting oneself a goal works as partial commitment since it creates psychological costs of falling short of the goal. Hence, the more confident a student is that she has self-control, the higher the goals are that she can optimally set for herself. Therefore, we also conjectured that
23 The grade 2.3 in the German grading system corresponds to an A- in the US grading system. 24 This was two months before students reported on how many time they really invested one week before the exam.
18

planned effort increases in the effort that we revealed as stimulus. Taken together, our conjectures are equivalent to our hypothesis H5.
5.2 Empirical Strategy
A peer effect is prevalent if a students' current effort affects the goal setting behavior of the other students in her tutorial group. The clean and causal identification of peer effects on individual behavior is subject to numerous challenges. In his seminal contribution, Manski (1993) mentions two effects that cannot easily be separated from the true (endogenous) peer effect: contextual (exogenous) effects and correlated effects. In our setting, contextual effects would occur if a student's planned effort varied with the exogenous characteristics of her tutorial group, e.g., with characteristics of the tutor or the time when the tutorial was scheduled. By contrast, a correlated effect would be present if students' effort plans were more strongly correlated within a tutorial group than within the whole sample, because students with similar characteristics, such as talent or ambition, selected themselves into the same tutorial group. Both the contextual and the correlated effects differ from the true peer effects with respect to causality: Individual behavior is directly influenced by a peer's behavior if the relationship between the two is a peer effect, but not if it is a contextual or correlated effect.
Note that by our experimental design, the relationship between the stimulus and planned effort is directed: While students reacted to the stimulus when reporting their planned effort, the students whose early effort was used as stimulus had no information about the future effort plans of other students in her group when reporting her current effort. Hence, if the relation between the stimulus and individual planned effort can be interpreted as causal, the plausible interpretation is that the stimulus had a causal impact on planned effort, rather than vice versa.
Consider now the distinction between a peer effect, on the one hand, and a contextual or correlated effect, on the other hand. Our stimulus variable measures individual effort of one student rather than average group effort. Hence, the stimulus variable does not directly capture group characteristics. Still, the stimulus might vary with group characteristics. For instance, the current effort used as stimulus might be higher in tutorials with charismatic tutors or less talented students. In this case, the effect of the stimulus on students' planned effort could be confounded with the effect of group characteristics on both the stimulus and planned effort. To empirically isolate the (endogenous) peer effect, we introduce cluster fixed effects with a cluster dummy variables model as described in Cameron and Trivedi (2005).
19

The model, estimated via OLS, includes a tutorial-specific fixed effect and allows for correlations between the responses of students in the same tutorial.
Moreover, we test whether students self-selected into tutorial groups based on effort or talent. Simple bivariate distribution plots do not reveal any initial self-selection, neither with regard to effort, not with regard to talent.25 Students with higher current study time or with a higher level of talent do not seem to have selected themselves into a particular tutorial group. We confirm these preliminary indications with a Kruskal-Wallis equality-of population rank test and simultaneously test the equality of the early effort (respectively math) distribution across all tutorials. The null hypothesis that effort (math) is equal across all tutorials cannot be rejected. Overall, we are confident that we are able to separate peer effects from contextual and correlated effects.

5.3 Results
Table 8 reports the results from OLS regressions with included tutorial dummies. Our estimates are robust to five different outlier measures: dfits based on Welsch and Kuh (1977), a less restrictive dfits to exclude less extreme outliers, leverage, Cook's D influence statistic and studentized (jackknifed) residuals. The minimum number of outliers removed is three, the maximum is seven. The effect of the stimulus is highly significant and positively affects student's planned effort regardless of the calculated outlier statistic. These results indicate that students indeed adapt their goals upward in reaction to "good news" about the self-control of their peers. However, although tutorial dummies are jointly significant only when the jackknifed residual statistic is used (column 6), tutorial dependencies exist because standard errors are smaller in regressions when tutorial dummies are excluded. Hence, we find both peer effects and correlated effects on planned effort.

6 Discussion
We have conducted a field study to shed light on the interaction between self-control and peer effects. Our main contribution is to show that there exists a significant and sizable relation between connectedness to peers and self-controlled behavior. More self-controlled students are more likely to be connected and tend to have both more friends in total and more highly talented friends than their less self-controlled counterparts. Moreover, the connection to highly talented peers is an additional channel through which self-control positively affects performance. We also find gender differences: Female students are more self-controlled than

25 Bivariate distribution plots are not displayed.

20

their male counterparts, but do not outperform the latter although they seem to be equally talented. One possible reason is that female students seem to be less selective in their connections to peers. Although they have roughly the same number of friends as male students, they have fewer highly talented friends.
Our main finding of a positive relation between connectedness to peers and selfcontrolled behavior is in line with the theory provided by Battaglini, Bénabou and Tirole (2005). This theory predicts that only individuals with a sufficiently high prior probability of being self-controlled profit from teaming up with each other. This is because teaming up is helpful only if "good news" about the level of self-control of the other team members is sufficiently likely. Hence, if social network formation is endogenous and individuals link strategically (cf. Jackson and Wolinski, 1996), then the individuals with higher levels of prior self-control will choose to team up with each other whereas those with low levels of prior self-control will stay alone. Our findings are fully consistent with this prediction.
However, it remains an open question whether the theory provided by Battaglini, Bénabou and Tirole (2005) is the unique explanation of our results. Within the framework of our current study, we cannot identify the direction of causality between having friends and being highly self-controlled. Put differently, we cannot be sure that the social network of our experimental subjects is indeed endogenous and affected by individual levels of self-control. One possible alternative interpretation would be that students' social network (which might be exogenous) affects the degree to which students behave in a self-controlled manner. For instance, having friends with whom study activities are coordinated might serve as a commitment device that helps students to exhibit self-controlled behavior. In that view, it is rather the fact of being observed by peers than observing them that affects self-control. The results of our intervention which confronted the students with self-controlled behavior of their peers show that an effect of the former type (observing) is present, without excluding the possibility of the latter effect (being observed). In order to finally identify the direction of causality between having friends and being highly self-controlled, we would need an independent measure of students' time preferences that correlates with observed behavior. We did not find any correlation between monetary time preferences and observed behavior of our students, but this does not imply that such an independent measure does not exist. We leave it to future research to address this question.
21

7 References
Ainslie, G., and N. Haslam (1992): Hyperbolic Discounting. In: Choice over Time, ed. by G. Loewenstein and J. Elster, 57-92. Russell Sage Foundation, New York.
Ali, S. (2011): Learning Self-Control. Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(2), 857-893.
Ameriks, J., Caplin, A., Leahy, J., and T. Tyler (2007): Measuring Self-Control Problems. American Economic Review 97(3), 966-972.
Andersen, S., Harrison, G., Lau, M. and E. Rutström (2008): Eliciting Risk and Time Preferences. Econometrica 76(3), 583-618.
Andreoni , J., and C. Sprenger (2012): Risk Preferences are not Time Preferences. American Economic Review 102 (7), 3333-3356.
Ariely, D., and K. Wertenbroch (2002): Procastination, deadlines, and performance: selfcontrol by pre-commitment. Psychological Science 13(3), 219-224.
Ashraf, N., Karlan, D., and W. Yin (2006): Tying Odysseus to the Mast: Evidence from a Commitment Savings Product in the Philippines. Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(2), 673-697.
Battaglini, M., Bénabou, R., and J. Tirole (2005): Self-control in peer groups. Journal of Economic Theory 123, 105-134.
Bénabou, R., and M. Pycia (2002): Dynamic Inconsistency and Self-Control: a Planner-Doer Interpretation. Economics Letters 77 (3), 419-424.
Benhabib, J., Bisin, A., and A. Schotter (2010): Present Bias, Quasi Hyperbolic Discounting, and Fixed Costs. Games and Economic Behaviour 69(2), 205-223.
Bryan, G., Karlan, D., and S. Nelson (2010): Commitment Devices. Annual Review of Economics 2(1), 671-698.
22

Bucciol, A., Houser, D., and M. Piovesan (2011): Temptation at work. Harvard Business School Working Papers 11-090, Harvard Business School.
Burger, N., Charness, G., and J. Lynham (2011): Field and Online Experiments on SelfControl. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 77(3), 393-404.
Calvo-Armengol, A., Patacchini, E., and Y. Zenou (2009): Peer Effects and Social Networks in Education. Review of Economic Studies 76, 1239-1267.
Cameron, A., and P. Trivedi (2005): Microeconometrics: Methods and Applications, Cambridge University Press, New York.
DellaVigna, S., and U. Malmendier (2006): Paying Not to Go to the Gym. American Economic Review 96(3), 694-719.
Falk, A., and A. Ichino (2006): Clean Evidence on Peer Effects. Journal of Labor Economics, 24(1), 39-58.
Friebel, G., Lalanne, M., Richter, B., Schwardmann, P., and P. Seabright (2013): Selectivity and opportunism: two dimensions in trust games and network formation. Mimeo, Goethe University Frankfurt.
Fudenberg, D., and D. Levine (2006): A Dual-Self Model of Impulse Control. American Economic Review 96(5), 1449-1476.
Gneezy, U., Niederle, M., and A. Rustichini (2003): Performance in competitive environments: Gender differences. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(3), 1049-1074.
Gul, F., and W. Pesendorfer (2001): Temptation and Self-Control. Econometrica 69(6), 14031435.
23

Houser, D., Schunk, D., Winter, J., and E. Xiao (2010): Temptation and Commitment in the Laboratory. IEW Working Papers 488, Institute for Empirical Research in Economics ­ University of Zurich.
Hoxby, C. (2000): Peer Effects in the Classroom: Learning from Gender and Race Variation. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 7867.
Hoxby, C., and G. Weingarth (2005): Taking Race Out of the Equation: School Reassignment and the Structure of Peer Effects. Mimeo, Harvard University.
Jackson, M., and Wolinsky, A. (1996): A strategic model of social and economic networks. Journal of Economic Theory 71(1), 44-74.
Jurajda, S., and D. Münich (2011): Gender Gap in Performance under Competitive Pressure: Admissions to Czech Universities. American Economic Review 101(3), 514-518.
Koch, A., and J. Nafziger (2011): Self-Regulation through Goal-Setting. Scandinavian Journal of Economics 113(1), 212­227.
Laibson, D. (1997): Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting. Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(2), 443-478.
Lalanne, L., and P. Seabright (2013): The Old Boy Network: Gender Differences in the Impact of Social Networks of Remuneration on Top Executive Jobs. Centre for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper 8367.
Manski, C. (1993): Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem. Review of Economic Studies 60(3), 531 -542.
Mas, A., and E. Moretti (2009): Peers at Work. American Economic Review 99(1), 112-145.
Niederle, M., and L. Vesterlund (2007): Do women shy away from competition? Do men compete too much? Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(3), 1067-1101.
24

Noor, J. (2011): Temptation and Revealed Preference. Econometrica 79(2), 601-633.
O'Donoghue, T., and M. Rabin (1999): Doing it now or later. American Economic Review 93(2), 186-191.
Sacerdote, B. (2001): Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth Roommates. Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (2), 681-704.
Strotz, R. (1955): Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization. Review of Economic Studies 23(2), 165-180.
Suvorov, A., and J. Van de Ven (2008): Goal-Setting as a Self-Regulation Mechanism. CEFIR/NES Working Paper 122.
Takeuchi, K. (2011): Non-parametric test of time consistency: Present bias and future bias. Games and Economic Behavior 71(2), 456-478.
Thaler, R., and H. Shefrin (1981): An economic theory of self-control. Journal of Political Economy 89(2), 392-406.
Wagner, G., Frick, J., and J. Schupp (2007): The German Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP): Scope, Evolution and Enhancements. Schmollers Jahrbuch : Journal of Applied Social Science Studies / Zeitschrift für Wirtschafts- und Sozialwissenschaften 127(1), 139-169.
Welsch, R., and E. Kuh (1977): Linear Regression Diagnostics. Technical Report 923-977, Massachusetts Institute of, Technology, Cambridge, MA.
Wong, W. (2008): How much time-inconsistency is there and does it matter? Evidence on self-awareness, size, and effects. Journal of Economic Behavior 68(3), 645-656.
Zimmerman, D. (2003): Peer Effects in Academic Outcomes: Evidence from a Natural Experiment. Review of Economics and Statistics 85(1), 9-23.
25

Appendix A

Table 1: Summary Statistics

Variable

# of obs. # of obs. if var =1 Mean Std. dev. p50 Min Max

micro score (performance) math score (talent) effort (minutes per week)

96 100 70

- 56.59 20.70 58 0 88 - 48.19 20.80 51 0 82 - 70.28 67.20 60 0 360

self control (1=yes) gender (1=female)

117

63

0.54 0.50

10 1

117

52

0.44 0.50

00 1

friends (1= at least one friend) degree

117 117

55

0.47 0.50

00 1

23

0.94 1.33

00 7

Notes: Calculation based on data collected in spring and summer 2013. Sample includes first year economics students. Variables micro score, math score and effort are metric. The construction of self control is described in detail in section 3.2. The variable gender is binary and 44% of the students are female. The variable friends is binary as well. 55 students reported to have studied with at least one friend for the micro course. The count variable degree gives the number of friends a student has.

Table 2: Self control, Talented Peers and Performance
(1) (2) (3) (4) OLS OLS FGLS OLS micro score micro score micro score micro score

(5) FGLS micro score

self control (1=yes) math score gender (1=female) degree

8.896* (4.737) 0.580*** (0.110) -4.251 (4.413)

talented friends

constant
Observations adj. R2 F-statistic p value F-statistic

23.805*** (6.385) 88 0.422 22.743 0.0000

8.553* (4.932) 0.579*** (0.111) -4.008 (4.484) 0.574 (1.194)
23.300*** (6.471) 88 0.417 17.276 0.0000

7.974** (3.734) 0.578*** (0.086) -4.089 (3.300) 1.097 (1.126)
23.142*** (5.489) 88 0.436 17.836 0.0000

7.125 (4.854) 0.580*** (0.105) -2.111 (4.426)
4.340** (1.938) 21.807*** (6.225)
88 0.441 18.837 0.0000

6.831* (3.760) 0.580*** (0.084) -2.230 (3.376)
4.067** (1.962) 22.188*** (5.337)
88 0.460 19.540 0.0000

Notes: Dependant variable is the score obtained in microeconomics I exam. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level. Feasible generalized least square (FGLS) is calculated with a skedasticity function that includes math score and self control.

26

Table 3: Wilcoxon Rank-Sum (Mann-Whitney) Tests

performance by gender

observations rank sum expected

male female combined

55 2915.5 2667.5

41 1740.5 1988.5

96

4656

4656

z value p value of z
talent by gender

1.838 0.0661

male female combined

61 3310.5 3080.5

39 1739.5 1969.5

100

5050

5050

z value p value of z
performance by early submission+ workshop attendance

1.626 0.1040

yes (both criteria fulfilled) no (only one or none criterion fulfilled)
combined
z value p value of z

31

1980

1829

86

4923

5074

117

6903

6903

-0.933 0.3509

Notes: Performance is measured with the score obtained in Microeconomics I exam. Talent is measured with score obtained in Math exam. Results on performance and talent indicate, if anything, higher levels for men. There is no difference in performance with regard to workshop attendance+early submission of midterm assignment.

27

Effort prior to micro exam and self control

.002

Kernel density .0005 .001 .0015

0

0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 Effort in Minutes per week

Not being self-controlled

Being self-controlled

Figure 2: Effort (week before exam) and Self control
Notes: The figure gives kernel density estimates for effort (minutes studied per week one week before the exam took place) for the self-controlled and not self-controlled cohorts. One outlier is excluded. The bandwidth is 90. Dashed vertical lines give the average effort, dotted lines give the median effort. A Wilcoxon test rejects the hypothesis that both groups are not statistically different with regard to effort with a p-value of 0.078.

28

Table 4: Self-Control on General Connectedness

(1) (2) (3)

probit

probit

probit

friends (1=yes) friends (1=yes) friends (1=yes)

math score gender (1=female) self control (1=yes) gender x self control gender x talent constant

0.020*** (0.007) -0.077 (0.310) 0.593* (0.303)
-1.143*** (0.395)

0.020*** (0.007) 0.081 (0.535) 0.673* (0.357) -0.243 (0.632)
-1.173*** (0.409)

0.018* (0.009) -0.333 (0.728) 0.602** (0.306)
0.005 (0.014) -1.038** (0.491)

math sc

0.0067*** (0.002) 0.215** (0.109)

Observations pseudo R2 F-statistic p value F-statistic loglikelihood AIC BIC

100 0.131 15.368 0.0015 -59.9514 127.9028 138.3235

100 0.132 15.429 0.0039 -59.8717 129.7434 142.7692

100 0.132 15.893 0.0032 -59.8730 129.7459 142.7718

Notes: Dependant variable friends is binary and equal to 1 if the student named at least one learning partner; zero otherwise. Robust standard errors in parentheses. math/ sc: average marginal effect of friends w.r.t. math score/ self control. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level.

29

Table 5: Self-Control on General Connectedness

(1) (2)

(3)

poisson negative binomial negative binomial

degree

degree

degree

math score gender (1=female) self control (1=yes) constant

0.006 (0.008) -0.286 (0.264) 0.627** (0.271) -0.539 (0.561) (0.395)

0.006 (0.007) -0.318 (0.279) 0.641** (0.296) -0.517 (0.366) (0.409)

0.006 (0.008) -0.318 (0.272) 0.641** (0.270) -0.517 (0.589) (0.491)

sc 0.639** (0.255)

Observations Wald-statistic p value Wald-statistic dispersion parameter  p value  loglikelihood AIC BIC

100 8.307 0.040
-143.9276 295.8553 306.2760

100 8.209 0.042 0.526 0.0014 -138.8002 287.6004 300.6263

100 9.036 0.029
-138.8002 287.6004 300.6263

Notes: Dependant count variable degree is defined as number of friends.Robust standard errors are in parentheses for the first and third model. The second model was calculated without robust standard errors to retrieve the dispersion parameter . Overdispersion is present. sc: average marginal effect of degree with respect to self control. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level.

30

Table 6: Self-Control and (Un-)talented friends

(1) (2)

poisson

poisson

talented friends untalented friends

math score gender (1=female) self control (1=yes) constant

0.005 (0.008) -0.941*** (0.337) 0.864** (0.360) -1.279** (0.550)

0.007 (0.011) 0.131 (0.357) 0.341 (0.346) -1.272 (0.775)

gender sc

-0.391*** (0.136) 0.375*** (0.141)

Observations Wald-statistic p value Wald-statistic loglikelihood AIC BIC

100 15.911 0.001 -85.142 178.284 188.704

100 1.547 0.671 -99.701 207.403 217.823

Notes: Dependant variable is the number of (un-)talented friends and is a count variable. Talented friends are friends that have a math score weakly above the median of the cohort, untalented friends have a math score below the median of the cohort. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Overdispersion is not present and both models are fitted using Poisson distribution. gender / sc: average marginal effect of dependent variables w.r.t. gender and self control. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level.

31

Table 7: Gender and Self-Control

(1) (2)

probit

probit

self control (1=yes) self control (1=yes)

(3) probit self control (1=yes)

math score gender (1=female) gender x talent constant

0.623*** (0.240)
-0.174 (0.157)

0.024*** (0.008) 1.154*** (0.320)
-1.391*** (0.461)

0.026*** (0.010) 1.397* (0.796) -0.006 (0.017) -1.498*** (0.571)

math gender

0.0078*** (0.002) 0.375*** (0.085)

Observations F-statistic p value F-statistic loglikelihood AIC BIC

117 6.754 0.0094 -77.2923 158.5847 164.1090

100 15.663 0.0004 -56.3700 118.7400 126.5555

100 16.439 0.0009 -56.2932 120.5863 131.0070

Notes: Dependant variable self control is binary and equal to 1 if the student behaved in a time consistent manner concerning early goal achievement; zero otherwise. Calculation based on data collected in spring and summer 2013. Sample includes first year economics students. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level. math/ gender: average marginal effect of self control w.r.t. math score and gender.

32

Probability of being self-controlled 0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1

Being self-controlled at different talent levels
By Gender
10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 Math Score
Predicted probability, females 95% confidence interval, females Predicted probability, males 95% confidence interval, males
Figure 3: Self-control by gender
33

Table 8: Peer effect and Goal Setting

(1) (OLS )
planned effort

(2) (OLS) dfits I planned effort

(3) ( OLS) dfits II planned effort

(4) (OLS) leverage planned effort

(5) (OLS) cook's dist planned effort

(6) (OLS) stud. resid planned effort

Stimulus (max peer) initial effort gender (1=female) math score tutorial dummies constant

0.190** (0.088) 0.480*** (0.160) 15.062 (20.368) -0.402 (0.524)
yes (five) 47.528* (26.789)

0.226*** (0.080) 0.519*** (0.163) 4.859 (16.843) -1.009** (0.382)
yes (four) 71.481*** (21.715)

0.242*** (0.080) 0.411*** (0.135) 14.405 (19.514) -0.668 (0.445)
yes (four) 50.355** (24.233)

0.264*** (0.079) 0.513** (0.201) 19.463 (20.244) -0.686 (0.464)
yes (four) 37.577 (25.311)

0.226*** (0.080) 0.519*** (0.163) 4.859 (16.843) -1.009** (0.382)
yes (four) 71.481*** (21.715)

0.205*** (0.074) 0.439*** (0.123) 16.840 (16.924) -0.839* (0.431)
yes (five) 61.934*** (21.776)

34

Observations adj. R2 F-statistic p value F-statistic p-value (all tutorial dummies=0)

54 0.221 3.613 0.0025 0.1239

47 0.363 5.456 0.0002 0.8472

51 0.253 5.617 0.0001 0.3022

48 0.167 4.569 0.0008 0.2407

47 0.363 5.456 0.0002 0.8472

51 0.395 5.690 0.0001 0.0516

Notes: Dependant variable is planned effort (in minutes per week) the student intends to study after he receives the signal, i.e. the current study time of the most hard-working (non-)ambitious peer. Following outlier statistics are calculated: dfits based on Welsch and Kuh (1977) in column 2, a less restrictive dfits statistics in column 3, data points that are high in leverage in column 4, Cook's distance that combines leverage and residual in column 5, and studentized (jackknifed) residuals in column 6. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level.

 
Appendix B
Instructions and Additional Material
 
  Wave 1  
 current study time and aspired grades  Wave 2 
 Step 1: goals and stimulus   Step 2: workshop registration   Step 3: midterm assignment  Wave 4    Part 1: paperandpencilexperiment   Part 2: social network   Part 3: preferences 
  The English translations are followed by the original German documents. 
35   

 

SURVEY ON STUDY SITUATION   

Part A 

 

Dear student, 

the teacher, Prof. Dr. Dr. Lydia Mechtenberg, has given me the permission to conduct a short  survey on the overall study situation in the Bachelor's program in economics. I kindly ask you 

3 minutes surveyto take 

 time to participate in this part of the 

. I will later 

completely anonymize your data; until then they will be treated strictly confidential. 

 

A1. Name: ________________________________ 

A2. Student ID: ________________________________ 

A3. How often did you attend this tutorial (or another tutorial for this course) so far?         almost always      sometimes      almost never 

A4. How often did you attend the lecture (Microeconomics I) so far?        almost always      sometimes      almost never 

A5. Apart from the lecture and the official tutorials, how much time per week did you on  average study for this course (Microeconomics I) so far?       __________ minutes 

A6. Do you have any engagements besides your study program that take a substantial part  of your time, e.g. occupation, volunteer work, care, parenting? 

 If yes, please state how many hours per week on average you devote to these  engagements:______________   

 

Cordial thanks for your participation!   Dr. Berno Büchel 

36   

 

SURVEY ON STUDY SITUATION   

Part B 

 

Dear student, 

the teacher, Prof. Dr. Dr. Lydia Mechtenberg, has given me the permission to conduct a short  survey on the overall study situation in the Bachelor's program in economics. I kindly ask you 

3 minutes surveyto take 

 time to participate in this part of the 

. I will later 

completely anonymize your data; until then they will be treated strictly confidential. 

 

B1. Name: ________________________________ 

B2. Student ID: ________________________________ 

B3. When do you plan to write the exam of this course (Microeconomics I)?        at the first date    at the second date     not at all 

If you plan to take the exam, please answer the following question: 

B4. Which grade do you aspire in this course (Microeconomics I)?       1.0  1.3      1.7  2.3      2.7  3.3   

  3.7  4.0 

 

Cordial thanks for your participation!   Dr. Berno Büchel 

 

 

 

37   

 

SURVEY ON STUDY SITUATION   

Part C 

 

Dear student, 

the teacher, Prof. Dr. Dr. Lydia Mechtenberg, has given me the permission to conduct a short  survey on the overall study situation in the Bachelor's program in economics. I kindly ask you 

3 minutes surveyto take 

 time to participate in this part of the 

. I will later 

completely anonymize your data; until then they will be treated strictly confidential. 

 

C1. Name: ________________________________ 

C2. Student ID: ________________________________ 

C3. Please state now your goal: How often do you want to attend this tutorial (or another 
tutorial for this course) in the course of the ongoing semester?         almost always      sometimes      almost never 

C4. Please state now your goal: How often do you want to attend the lecture 
(Microeconomics I) in the course of the ongoing semester?        almost always      sometimes      almost never 

C5. Please state now your goal: Apart from the lecture and the official tutorials, how much  time per week do you want to study for this course (Microeconomics I) on average in the  course of the ongoing semester? 

 

Cordial thanks for your participation!   Dr. Berno Büchel 

 

 

 

38   

 
PRELIMINARY INTERIM RESULTS SURVEY PART A AND B    A first glance at the data suggests the following for your tutorial group:    
 Those of you who aim at a grade between 1.0 and 2.3 have studied up to  5 hours a week until now for this course. (Tutorial and lecture are not  included.) 
 Those of you who aim at a grade between 2.7 and 4.0 have studied up to  30 minutes until now for this course. (Tutorial and lecture are not  included.)  
   
39   

 
PRELIMINARY INTERIM RESULTS SURVEY PART A AND B    A first glance at the data suggests the following for your tutorial group:    
 Those of you who aim at a grade between 1.0 and 2.3 have studied up to  3 hours a week until now for this course. (Tutorial and lecture are not  included.) 
 Those of you who aim at a grade between 2.7 and 4.0 have studied up to  90 minutes until now for this course. (Tutorial and lecture are not  included.)  
   
40   

 
 

Registration

Hereby I register bindingly for a workshop supplementing Microeconomics I on June 15, 2013. I confirm to pay 3 EURO compensation for the organizational costs incurred in case of non-appearance or cancellation.

Name: _________________________ Date: _______________________

Student ID: _____________________ Signature: _____________________

If you do not want to decide yet: Binding online registration is possible until June 14, 2013 on https://www.wisocommsy.uni-hamburg.de/, following the link "Workshop Mikroökonomie (VWL)."

41   

 

  I,   Name:  Student ID:  Registered in tutorial:    plan (without any obligation) to submit the midterm assignment 
in the week of 28 to 30 May (early submission with feedback):  in the week of 11 to 13 June (late submission without feedback):     

Please tick! 

42   

 
Survey 
  Dear student,    I  kindly  ask  you  to  participate  in  the  following  survey.  Of  course,  your  data  will  be  completely  anonymized and treated strictly confidential. On the following pages you will find the instructions for  further reading and we will also explain them verbally to you.   
 
Instructions    Part 1: Decisions    In  the  first  part  of  the  experiment,  you  will  have  to  make  decisions  between  two  alternatives.  Your  decision affects how much money you will win in form of an amazonvoucher. (Amazon offers a wide  range  of  products;  amongst  others  books,  electronics,  clothes,  apps,  cosmetics,  music  files  and  software  for  immediate  download.  Amazon  vouchers  are  valid  for  three  years.)  The  voucher  will  be  sent to you via email and it will be immediately valid. Therefore your email address is needed.     The date of receipt of your voucher and the voucher's amount depend on your decisions.      Task    Now you have to answer a set of 10 questions concerning the following situation:    A  voucher  of  A  will  be  given  to  you  online  at  the  end  of  the  experiment.  Alternatively,  if  you  are  willing to wait X days (from today onwards), then we will send you a voucher of B, which is greater  than  the  amount  A,  i.e.  B  >  A.  Consider  the  longest  acceptable  delay  X  for  which  you  would  be  willing to wait to receive the larger amount B instead of A.    Answer the question by filling out the blank below:    
F: To me, receiving A today is equally as good as receiving B in __ days.    Note that receiving A today, respectively B in X days, means that you receive the voucher with an  amount of A today by email, respectively an amount of B in X days by email.     In order to receive the larger amount B, you must accept some delay in any case. Decide what length  of delay makes the two options the same to you, and fill in the number of days. Attention: There is  no right or wrong answer ­ any preference is possible. However, it is important that you provide your  true preference. We will explain below why this is also optimal for you.     
43   

 

Payment mechanism 

After  each  one  of  you  answers  all  10  questions,  the  computer  will  randomly  select  one  of  the 

questions.  All  ten  questions  are  equally  likely  to  be  selected.  Your  actual  payment  will  be  based  on 

your answer to the selected question.  

 

 

 

To determine which of A or B you will receive the computer randomly chooses again a number. It 

will be generated independently of your answers to the questions. This random number specifies the 

actual delay of B, measured in days, in case you are not eligible to receive A. 

 

   

random number

  

A< B

 

 

 

 

  

 

  A    B

 

 

 
tod  ay
 
 

acceptable delay X  in days 

time

 

 

If  the  random  number  is  greater  than  your  longest  acceptable  delay,  you  will  get  A  today  (this 

refers to all arrows to the right of `accepted delay'). 

 

If  the  random  number  is  smaller  than  or  equal  to  your  longest  acceptable  (this  refers  to  all  arrows 

between  `today'  and  `accepted  delay  X  in  days'),  you  will  get  B  according  to  the  randomly  chosen 

number of the computer, i.e. at the latest the day you specified as longest acceptable delay. 

 

Example: 

 

Suppose that you were asked the following question: 

 

F: To me, receiving A today is equally as good as receiving B in X days. 

 

You respond to a question by inserting X. In other words and with regard to the chart below, 

you  put  your  `accepted  delay'  on  the  position  at  the  timeline  that  matches  your  true 

preferences.  Then,  the  computer  generates  a  random  number,  say  Z.  If  Z  is greater  than  X 

days, you will get A today. If Z is smaller than X days, you will get B in Z days. 

 

 

 

  44 

 

 

 
   

random number

A< B

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
A  

B

 

 

to  day

acceptable delay 

time

  in X days 
 

 

Your optimal strategy 

Note  that  this  procedure  is  designed  such  that  your  best  response  is  to  truthfully  write  down  the 

longest  delay  for  which  you  are  willing  to  wait  in  order  to  get  the  larger  amount  B.  We  will  now 

show you why truthful reporting is the best strategy for you. 

 

Misreporting  means  that  you  either  underreport  or  overreport  the  longest  acceptable  delay.  We 

will show that in either case you might be worse off compared to telling the truth, but never better 

off. 

 

Underreporting 

Suppose you did not respond truthfully and stated that that your longest acceptable delay was only 

X days, even though your true acceptable delay was X days.  

 

   

random number

A< B

 

   

1.   2.   3.

 

A   
 

B

 

 
to day
 
 

underreporting X- acceptable delay  in X days 

time

The  computer  randomly  chooses  a  number,  Z,  the  proposed  delay.  We  distinguish  between  three 

cases: 

1. If  the  random  number  lies  within  the  interval  [today;  underreporting  X],  you  get  B  in  Z 

days. That would have also happened if you had truly reported X days. Thus, underreporting 

does not make you better off than a true response. 

45   

 

2. If the random number lies within the interval (underreporting X; accepted delay X in days),  you will get A today. Underreporting makes you worse off.  Why? Actually, you are willing  to  wait  X  days  and  hence  you  would  also  be  willing  to  wait  the  Z  days  generated  by  the  computer to get the higher amount B. 
3. If the random number was higher than the accepted delay X in days, you would get A today.  The  same  would  happen  if  you  truly  reported  X  days.  Thus,  underreporting  does  not  make  you better off than a true response.     

Overreporting 

 

Suppose  that  you  did  not  respond  truthfully  and  stated  that  your  longest  acceptable  delay  was  X+ 

days,  even  though  your  true  acceptable  delay  was  only  X  days.  The  computer  randomly  chooses  a 

number Z. We must distinguish again between three cases: 

 

 
 

random number

A< B

 

 

 

 

 

   

A

1.  2.  B

3. 

 

 

to  day
 
 
 

acceptable delay  overreporting X+ in X days 

time

1. Case 1 and 3 are similar to underreporting: overreporting does not make you better off than 

a true response. 

2. If  the  random  number  lies  within  the  interval  (accepted  delay  X  in  days;  overreporting  X), 

you  will  get  B  in  Z  days.  Overreporting  makes  you  worse  off  than  truthful  reporting.  Why? 

Actually, you are willing to wait X days to get B. Now you have to wait too long for B and you 

regret  that  you  do  not  receive  A  today.  If  you  had  truly  answered  X  days,  you  would  have 

received A. 

In  sum,  your  best  strategy  is  always  to  answer  the  questions  truthfully.  Specifically,  case  1  and  3 

neither make you better off nor worse off than the truth. Case 2 makes you strictly worse off than 

the truth.  

 

46   

 
Test questions 
Note: A<B     
1. For Matthias, receiving A today is equally as good as receiving B in X days. The computer  randomly  chooses  a  number  Z  within  the  interval  (0,  X].  Which  amount  does  Matthias  receive? When does he receive the amount?   [Answer: Matthias receives B in Z days.] 
   
2. Lukas  states  that  his  longest  acceptable  delay  for  receiving  B  is  X  days.  The  generated  random  number  Z  is  greater  than  X.  Which  amount  does  Lukas  receive?  When  does  he  receive the amount?   [Answer: Lukas receives A today.] 
   
3. Luca's longest acceptable delay for receiving B is X days. The generated random number is Z  is equal to X. Which amount does Luca receive? When does she receive the amount?  [Answer: Luca receives B in Z=X days.] 
   
4. Eva`s  longest  acceptable  delay  for  receiving  B  is  X  days.  Which  values  must  the  random  number  Z  take  so  that  Eva  is  eligible  to  receive  B?  After  how  many  days  does  Eva  receive  B?   [Answer: Z has to remain within the interval [today; X]. Eva receives B in Zdays.] 
      Please  answer  the  ten  questions  one  after  the  other.  Do  not  use  pencils  and  avoid  corrections,  otherwise  we  cannot  consider  your  answers  for  the  payment.  You  must  not  interact  with  your  colleagues.     Thank you!     
47   

 
Questions  Please  provide  besides  your  name  and  Student  ID  also  your  email  address  such  that  I  can  send  you  the  corresponding  voucher.  Of  course,  your  data  will  be  completely  anonymized  and treated strictly confidential.   Name:   Student ID:  Emailaddress:    Please answer now the following 10 questions one after the other. Do not use pencils and  avoid any corrections, otherwise we cannot consider your answer for the disbursement. It is  not  allowed  to  interact  with  other  students  (e.g.  to  copy).  Answer  one  question  after  the  other  by  filling  in  the  blanks.  Finally,  exactly  one  of  these  answers  will  be  relevant  for  disbursement.   
F1: To me receiving 5 today is equally as good as receiving 15 in __ days. 
F2: To me receiving 5 today is equally as good as receiving 10 in __ days. 
F3: To me receiving 10 today is equally as good as receiving 20 in __ days. 
F4: To me receiving 15 today is equally as good as receiving 25 in __ days. 
F5: To me receiving 20 today is equally as good as receiving 25 in __ days. 
F6: To me receiving 10 today is equally as good as receiving 15 in __ days. 
F7: To me receiving 5 today is equally as good as receiving 25 in __ days. 
F8: To me receiving 5 today is equally as good as receiving 20 in __ days. 
F9: To me receiving 10 today is equally as good as receiving 25 in __ days. 
F10: To me receiving 15 today is equally as good as receiving 20 in __ days. 
48   

 

Instructions 

Part 2: Survey 

I kindly ask you to participate in the following survey. Of course, your data will be  completely anonymized and treated strictly confidential. 

D1. Name:  

D2. Student ID:  

D3. Did you join with fellow students in order to prepare for "Microeconomics I" over the  course of the semester?         yes      no 

If your answer is yes, please name the fellow students in question in the first column of the  table below (D4). Please answer for each fellow student the following four questions in the  table. Please provide an estimate in case you are unable to response.  

D4: name of the  fellow student  
                 

D5: Since  when  (approximately ) do you know  each other in  person  (month and  year)?  
                                   

D6: How much  time do you  spend  together per  month  (besides jointly  attended  courses)?   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

D7: How much  of the time  you spend  together is  dedicated to  leisure  activities?   (in %)        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

D8: How much of  the time you spend  together is  dedicated to study related activities?  (e.g. studying for  this particular or  any other course)?  (in %) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

49   

 

You are asked to give assessments about different groups of students. 

 The first group consists of the fellow students you have mentioned and are called  "your learning partners". If you indicated to have no learning partner in D3, you can  skip the questions related to this group.  
 The second group consists of all fellow students in the official tutorial group you  attended most frequently. This group is called "your tutorial group".  Please state  the tutorial you attended most frequently:  
  Weekday:       Time:             Tutor:  

 The third group consists of all students that attend the Microeconomics I course. 

 The  forth  group  consists  of  students  in  Germany  in  general.  Assessments  refer  to 

their hypothetical behavior, if they had attended this course. 

 

Group of students 

D9: How large do  you think is the  share   of students who  registered non bindingly   for early submission  of the midterm  assignment?  (in % of the group)  

D10: How large do  you think is the  share  of students who  delivered  the mid term assignment at  the earlier date (and  henceforth were  eligible to receive  feedback?)  (in % of the group) 

D11: How much time  per week do you  think did students'  study on average for  this course  (Microeconomics I),  apart from the  lecture and official  tutorial?  (in minutes) 

your learning 

 

 

 

partners (if D3: yes) 

your tutorial group       

 

all participants of the       

Microeconomics I 

course 

expected behavior of       

all students in 

Germany  

 

D12. Please provide the grade you obtained in the Mathematics I exam:____________ 

D13.  How  much  time  did  you  spend  studying  for  this  course  (Microeconomics  I)  in  the  last  seven days, apart from the lecture and official tutorial: ____________ minutes 

 

 

50   

 

Instructions 

Part 3: Survey 

I kindly ask you to participate in the following survey. Of course, your data will be completely  anonymized and treated strictly confidential. 

E1. Name:  

E2. Student ID:  

 

E3. How do you see yourself: Are you generally a person who is willing to take risks or do you try to  avoid risks?  

Please tick a box on the scale, where the value 0 means: `not at all willing to take risks' and the value  10 means: `highly willing to take risks'. You may grade your answer with values in between. 

 

     Not at all willing                Highly willing       to take risks                     to take risks 
 
      0       1    2  3  4  5         6           7            8            9          10   

 

E4. People can behave differently in different situations. How would you rate your willingness to take  risks with respect to the following areas? 

Please tick for each row a box on the scale! 

 How is that...  

  Not at all willing         

to take  risks               
 
               0       1        2        3         4        5           6  

  while driving ? 

 

  Highly willing    to take risks 
7         8          9       10 

in financial matters? 

 

during leisure/sports? 
in your professional career? 
with your health? 
with your faith in other  people?    

       

51   

 

E5. Please consider what you would do in the following situation: Imagine that you had won 100,000  Euros a lottery. Immediately after receiving the amount, you get a financial offer from a reputable  bank, the conditions of which are as follows: 

There is the chance to double the money within two years. It is, however, equally probable to lose  half of the amount invested. You have the opportunity to invest the full amount, part of the amount  or reject the offer.  

What  share  of  your  lottery  winnings  would  you  be  prepared  to  invest  in  the  risky,  yet  lucrative  investment? 

 

The full amount of 100.000 Euros .......................................................................................................... 

The amount of 80.000 Euros ................................................................................................................... 

The amount of 60.000 Euros ................................................................................................................... 

The amount of 40.000 Euros................................................................................................................... 

The amount of 20.000 Euros ................................................................................................................... 

Nothing, I would decline the offer ......................................................................................................... 

 

E6. To what extent does the following statement apply to you?    ,,When I plan to do something, I do it up to the time specified."    Please tick a box on the scale, where the value 0 means: `not correct at all' and the value 10 means: 
`always and absolutely correct'. You may grade your answer with values in between. 

 

not correct                 always and   at all                  absolutely correct                         

 
   0       1    2  3  4  5         6           7           8            9          10   

 

 

Cordial thanks for your participation! 

52   

 

UMFRAGE ZUR STUDIENSITUATION   

Teil A 

 

Liebe(r) Studierende(r) 

Die Dozentin, Prof. Dr. Dr. Lydia Mechtenberg, hat mir die Erlaubnis gegeben, eine kleine 

Erhebung zur Studiensituation im Bachelor VWL durchzuführen. Ich bitte Sie, sich  

3 Minuten Umfrage Zeit zu nehmen, um an diesem Teil der 

 teilzunehmen. 

Ich werde Ihre Daten später vollständig anonymisieren und bis dahin streng vertraulich  behandeln.  

 

A1. Name: ________________________________ 

A2. Matrikelnummer: ________________________________ 

A3. Wie regelmäßig haben Sie bisher diese Übung (oder eine andere Übung zu diesem Kurs)  besucht?         fast immer      manchmal      fast nie 

A4. Wie regelmäßig haben Sie bisher die Vorlesung (Mikroökonomik I) besucht?        fast immer      manchmal      fast nie 

A5. Abgesehen von der Vorlesung und von den offiziellen Übungen, wie viel Zeit pro Woche  haben Sie bisher durchschnittlich für diesen Kurs (Mikroökonomik I) gelernt?       __________ Minuten 

A6. Haben Sie neben dem Studium Verpflichtungen, die einen erheblichen Teil Ihrer Zeit  beanspruchen, z. B. Berufstätigkeit, Ehrenamt, Pflegeaufgabe, Erziehungsaufgabe?  

Wenn ja, geben Sie bitte an, um wieviele Stunden pro Woche es sich dabei  durchschnittlich handelt:______________   

 

Herzlichen Dank für Ihre Teilnahme!  

Dr. Berno Büchel 

53   

 

UMFRAGE ZUR STUDIENSITUATION   

Teil B 

 

Liebe(r) Studierende(r) 

Die Dozentin, Prof. Dr. Dr. Lydia Mechtenberg, hat mir die Erlaubnis gegeben, eine kleine 

Erhebung zur Studiensituation im Bachelor VWL durchzuführen. Ich bitte Sie, sich  

3 Minuten Umfrage Zeit zu nehmen, um an diesem Teil der 

 teilzunehmen. 

Ich werde Ihre Daten später vollständig anonymisieren und bis dahin streng vertraulich  behandeln.  

 

B1. Name: ________________________________ 

B2. Matrikelnummer: ________________________________ 

B3. Wann planen Sie die Klausur zu diesem Kurs (Mikroökonomik I) zu schreiben?        Zum ersten Termin     Zum zweiten Termin    Gar nicht 

Falls Sie an der Klausur teilnehmen, beantworten Sie bitte abschließend die folgende Frage:  

B4. Welche Note streben Sie in diesem Kurs (Mikroökonomik I) an?       1.0  1.3      1.7  2.3      2.7  3.3   

  3.7  4.0 

 

Herzlichen Dank für Ihre Teilnahme!  

Dr. Berno Büchel 

 

 

 

54   

 

UMFRAGE ZUR STUDIENSITUATION   

Teil C 

 

Liebe(r) Studierende(r) 

Die Dozentin, Prof. Dr. Dr. Lydia Mechtenberg, hat mir die Erlaubnis gegeben, eine kleine 

Erhebung zur Studiensituation im Bachelor VWL durchzuführen. Ich bitte Sie, sich  

3 Minuten Umfrage Zeit zu nehmen, um an diesem Teil der 

 teilzunehmen. 

Ich werde Ihre Daten später vollständig anonymisieren und bis dahin streng vertraulich  behandeln.  

 

C1. Name: ________________________________ 

C2. Matrikelnummer: ________________________________ 

C3. Bitte nennen Sie nun Ihr Ziel: Wie regelmäßig wollen Sie im weiteren Verlauf des  Semesters an dieser Übung (oder an einer anderen Übung zu diesem Kurs) teilnehmen?         fast immer      manchmal      fast nie 

C4. Bitte nennen Sie nun Ihr Ziel: Wie regelmäßig wollen Sie im weiteren Verlauf des  Semesters an der Vorlesung Mikroökonomik I teilnehmen?        fast immer      manchmal      fast nie 

C5. Bitte nennen Sie nun Ihr Ziel:  Abgesehen von der Vorlesung und von den offiziellen  Übungen, wie viel Zeit pro Woche wollen Sie im weiteren Verlauf des Semesters für diesen  Kurs (Mikroökonomik I) lernen? ____________Minuten 

 

Herzlichen Dank für Ihre Teilnahme!  

Dr. Berno Büchel 

 

 

 

55   

 
VORLÄUFIGE ZWISCHENERGEBNISSE DER UMFRAGE TEILE A UND B     Nach einem ersten Blick in die Daten zeigt sich folgende Situation für Ihre  Übungsgruppe:  
 Diejenigen von Ihnen, die eine Note zwischen 1,0 und 2,3 anstreben,  haben bisher bis zu 5 Stunden pro Woche für diesen Kurs gelernt. (Die  Übung und Vorlesung selbst sind nicht eingerechnet.) 
 Diejenigen von Ihnen, die eine Note zwischen 2,7 und 4,0 anstreben,  haben bisher bis zu 30 Minuten pro Woche für diesen Kurs gelernt. (Die  Übung und Vorlesung selbst sind nicht eingerechnet.) 
   
56   

 
VORLÄUFIGE ZWISCHENERGEBNISSE DER UMFRAGE TEILE A UND B     Nach einem ersten Blick in die Daten zeigt sich folgende Situation für Ihre  Übungsgruppe:  
 Diejenigen von Ihnen, die eine Note zwischen 1,0 und 2,3 anstreben,  haben bisher bis zu 3 Stunden pro Woche für diesen Kurs gelernt. (Die  Übung und Vorlesung selbst sind nicht eingerechnet.) 
 Diejenigen von Ihnen, die eine Note zwischen 2,7 und 4,0 anstreben,  haben bisher bis zu 90 Minuten pro Woche für diesen Kurs gelernt. (Die  Übung und Vorlesung selbst sind nicht eingerechnet.) 
   
57   

 
 

Anmeldung
Hiermit melde ich mich verbindlich zum studienbegleitenden Workshop in Mikro I am 15. Juni 2013 an. Ich bestätige, dass ich im Falle meines Nichterscheinens oder Rücktritts 3 Euro als Entschädigung für die entstandenen Planungskosten entrichten werde.

Name _________________________ Datum: _______________________

Matrikel-Nr. _____________________ Unterschrift: _____________________

Wenn Sie sich jetzt noch nicht entscheiden wollen: Eine verbindliche OnlineAnmeldung ist bis zum  14. Juni 2013 möglich über https://www.wisocommsy.unihamburg.de/, unter "Workshop  Mikroökonomie (VWL)". 

58   

 
Ich,   Name:  Matrikelnummer:  Angemeldet in Übungsgruppe:    plane (unverbindlich), die Abgabe meiner Studienleistung 
in der Woche vom 28.30. Mai (frühe Abgabe mit Feedback):  in der Woche vom 11.13. Juni (späte Abgabe ohne Feedback):  
 

Bitte ankreuzen! 

59   

 
Umfrage 
Liebe(r) Studierende(r), 
ich möchte Sie bitten, an der folgenden Umfrage teilzunehmen. Selbstverständlich werde ich Ihre  Daten vollständig anonymisieren und streng vertraulich behandeln. Auf den nächsten Seiten finden  Sie die Instruktionen zum Nachlesen, die wir Ihnen aber auch verbal erklären werden.   
 
Instruktionen 
Teil 1: Entscheidungen  
In diesem  Teil des Experiments treffen Sie Entscheidungen zwischen jeweils zwei Alternativen. Ihre  Entscheidung  hat  Einfluss  darauf,  wie  viel  Geld  Sie  in  Form  eines  Amazongutscheines  gewinnen  werden.  (Amazon  bietet  eine  breite  Produktpalette  an;  u.a.  Bücher,  Elektronik,  Kleidung,  Apps,  Kosmetika, Musikfiles und Software, die man sofort herunterladen kann. Amazongutscheine verfallen  nach  drei  Jahren.)  Der  Gutschein  wird  Ihnen  online  zugeschickt  und  ist  sofort  nach  Empfang  einlösbar. Deswegen fragen wir Sie auch nach Ihrer EmailAdresse. 
Wann Sie den Gutschein empfangen und wie hoch Ihr Guthaben auf dem Gutschein sein wird, hängt  von Ihren Entscheidungen ab. 
 
Aufgabe 
Nun müssen Sie zehn Fragen beantworten, die sich alle auf folgende Situation beziehen: 
Nach dieser Vorlesung können Sie online einen Gutschein in Höhe von A erhalten. Sollten Sie jedoch  bereit sein, auf Ihre Auszahlung X Tage zu warten, schicken wir Ihnen stattdessen nach X Tagen (von  heute an gezählt) einen Gutschein in Höhe von B zu, wobei der Betrag B größer als der Betrag A ist,  d.h.  B  >  A.  Überlegen  Sie  sich  die  längste  von  Ihnen  akzeptierte  Verzögerung  X,  die  Sie  in  Kauf  nehmen würden, um den höheren Betrag B anstelle von A zu erhalten. 
Beantworten Sie die Frage, indem Sie die Lücke ausfüllen. 
  F: Für mich wäre A heute zu bekommen genauso gut, wie B in __ Tagen zu erhalten. 
Beachten  Sie,  dass  A  heute  zu  bekommen  bzw.  B  in  X  Tagen  bekommen  bedeutet,  dass  Sie  den  Gutschein mit einem Guthaben in Höhe von A bzw. B heute bzw. in X Tagen per Email erhalten. 
Um  den  höheren  Betrag  B  zu  bekommen,  müssen  Sie  in  jedem  Fall  eine  Verzögerung  hinnehmen.  Entscheiden Sie sich, wie viele Tage Sie bereit wären zu warten, damit beide Alternativen gleich gut  für  Sie  sind,  und  tragen  Sie  diese  Anzahl  von  Tagen  ein.  Achtung:  Es  gibt  hier  keine  korrekte  oder  fehlerhafte Antwort ­ jede Präferenz ist zulässig. Wichtig ist jedoch, dass Sie Ihre wahren Präferenzen  angeben; warum das auch für Sie am besten ist, erklären wir Ihnen weiter unten. 
 
60   

 

Auszahlungsmechanismus 

Alle  Beteiligten  beantworten  die  10  Fragen  auf  dem  Fragebogen,  der  im  Anschluss  ausgeteilt  wird.  Danach wählt der Computer, den wir vorne am Pult aufgebaut haben, zufällig eine der 10 Fragen aus.  Dabei  sind  alle  10  Fragen  gleich  wahrscheinlich.  Die  Antwort  auf  die  ausgewählte  Frage  bestimmt  Ihre tatsächliche Auszahlung. 

Nun wählt der Computer zufällig eine weitere Zahl, um zu bestimmen, ob Sie Betrag A oder B aus  der  ausgewählten  Frage  erhalten  werden.  Diese  Zufallszahl  wird  unabhängig  von  Ihren  Antworten  generiert  und  gibt  die  tatsächliche  Anzahl  der  Tage  an,  mit  deren  Verzögerung  der  Betrag  B  versendet wird, falls Sie nicht A erhalten.  

 

 
    Zufallszahl
 

mit A< B

 

 

 A B
  

 
he ute
   

akzeptierte Verzögerung X  in Tagen

Zeit

Hat  die  Zufallszahl  einen  größeren  Wert  als  die  von  Ihnen  angegebene  längste  akzeptierte  Verzögerung  (dies  betrifft  alle  Pfeile  rechts  von  ,akzeptierte  Verzögerung`),  erhalten  Sie  den  Betrag  A, und zwar heute. 

Sollte hingegen die Zufallszahl kleiner sein die von Ihnen angegebene Verzögerung oder im Grenzfall  gleich  der  von  Ihnen  angegebenen  Verzögerung  (dies  betrifft  alle  Pfeile  zwischen  ,heute`  und  ,akzeptierte  Verzögerung  X  in  Tagen`),  so  erhalten  Sie  den  Betrag  B,  und  zwar  gemäß  der  vom  Computer  gewählten  Zufallszahl,  d.h.  spätestens  an  dem  Tag,  an  dem  das  Ende  der  von  Ihnen  vorgeschlagenen Frist erreicht ist.   

Ein Beispiel: 

Stellen Sie sich vor, Sie werden Folgendes gefragt: 

F: Für mich ist A heute zu bekommen genauso gut wie B in X Tagen zu erhalten. 

Sie  beantworten  die  Frage,  indem  Sie  Ihr  X  setzen.  In  anderen  Worten  und  mit  Blick  auf  die  unten  stehende  Grafik,  setzen  Sie  Ihre  ,akzeptierte  Verzögerung`  auf  diejenige  Position  der 

61   

 

Zeitachse,  die  Ihren  wahren  Präferenzen  entspricht.  Danach  generiert  der  Computer  die  Zufallszahl,,nennen wir Sie Z. Ist Z größer als X Tage, erhalten Sie den Betrag A heute. Ist Z  keiner als X Tage, erhalten Sie den Betrag B nach Z Tagen. 

   

Zufallszahl

 

 

A   B
 

 
he ute
 

akzeptierte Verzögerung X  in Tagen

Zeit

Ihre optimale Strategie 

Das Vorgehen ist bewusst so gestaltet, dass es für Sie am besten ist, ehrlich die größte Anzahl von  Tagen  anzugeben,  die  Sie  gerade  noch  zu  warten  bereit  sind,  um  den  höheren  Betrag  von  B  zu  erhalten. Warum dies so ist, werden wir Ihnen im Folgenden erklären. 

Nicht die Wahrheit zu sagen, bedeutet, dass Sie Ihre Bereitschaft auf den höheren Betrag zu warten,   entweder über oder untertreiben. Die beiden folgenden Beispiele verdeutlichen, dass Sie mit beiden  Varianten schlechter, aber niemals besser gestellt sind, als wenn Sie die Wahrheit sagen würden. 

Untertreiben  

Nehmen  Sie  an,  dass  Sie  die  Frage  nicht  wahrheitsgemäß  beantwortet  haben,  sondern  angegeben  haben, dass Sie bereit wären nur X Tage zu warten, obwohl Sie in Wahrheit bereit gewesen wären,  X Tage zu warten. 
  Zufallszahl

 
 
A  
 
he ute
 

2.   3.   1. B
untertreiben X- akzeptierte Verzögerung X  Zeit in Tagen

62   

 

Der  Computer  wählt  nun  zufällig  eine  Zahl,  um  eine  Verzögerung  Z  vorzuschlagen.  Wir  müssen  zwischen drei Fällen unterscheiden:  

1. Liegt  die  Zufallszahl  im  Intervall  [heute;  untertreiben  X],  erhalten  Sie  den  Betrag  B  in  Z  Tagen.  Dasselbe  wäre  aber  auch  passiert,  wenn  Sie  wahrheitsgemäß  X  Tage  angegeben  hätten.  Untertreiben stellt Sie also nicht besser als eine wahre Antwort.   
2. Liegt die Zufallszahl im Intervall [ untertreiben X; akzeptierte Verzögerung X in Tagen ), erhalten Sie 
heute A. Untertreiben stellt Sie hier schlechter als die wahre Antwort. Warum? In Wahrheit wären 
Sie bereit gewesen, X Tage zu warten, und hätten daher auch die vom Computer gezogenen Z  Tage 
gewartet, um den höheren Betrag B zu erhalten.  
3. Ist die Zufallszahl größer als Ihre akzeptierte Verzögerung X in Tagen, erhalten Sie heute A. Dasselbe  wäre  aber  auch  passiert,  wenn  Sie  wahrheitsgemäß  X  Tage  angegeben  hätten.  Untertreiben  stellt  Sie also nicht besser als eine wahre Antwort.   
Übertreiben  

Nehmen  Sie  an,  dass  Sie  die  Frage  nicht  wahrheitsgemäß  beantwortet  haben,  sondern  angegeben  haben,  dass  Sie  bereit  wären  X+  Tage  zu  warten,  obwohl  Sie  in  Wahrheit  bereit  gewesen  wären,  X  Tage zu warten. 

Der Computer zieht nun zufällig eine Zahl Z. Wir müssen wieder zwischen drei Fällen unterscheiden: 

 
Zufallszahl
 

 
  1.  2.  3.  A B
 

 
h  eute

akzeptierte Verzögerung X  übertreiben X+ in Tagen

Zeit

1. In  den  Fällen  1  und  3  verhält  es  sich  analog  zum  Fall  Untertreiben:  Übertreiben  stellt  Sie  nicht 

besser als eine wahre Antwort.  

 

2. Liegt die Zufallszahl im Intervall ( akzeptierte Verzögerung X in Tagen; übertreiben X+ ), erhalten Sie 

den Betrag B in Z Tagen. Übertreiben stellt Sie hier schlechter als die wahre Antwort. Warum? In 

Wahrheit wären Sie bereit gewesen X Tage zu warten, um Betrag B zu erhalten. Nun müssen Sie zu 

lange  auf  B  warten  und  bedauern,  dass  Sie  nicht  stattdessen  heute  A  bekommen.  Sie  hätten 

heute A bekommen, wenn Sie wahrheitsgemäß X Tage angegeben hätten. 

 

 

Zusammenfassend  lässt  sich  sagen,  dass  es  für  Sie  die  beste  Strategie  ist,  die  Frage 

wahrheitsgemäß  zu  beantworten.  Fälle  1  und  3  stellen  Sie  weder  schlechter  noch  besser  als  die 

Wahrheit. Tritt Fall 2 ein, stellt Sie Über und Untertreiben strikt schlechter als die Wahrheit. Es ist 

also auf jeden Fall am besten, die Wahrheit zu sagen. 

63   

 
Vier Verständnisfragen   Beachte: A<B  1. Für Matthias ist es genauso gut, heute A wie in XTagen B (A< B) zu erhalten. Nun zieht der 
Computer  eine  Zufallszahl  Z,  die  zwischen  0  und  X  liegt.  Welchen  Betrag  bekommt  Matthias  ausgezahlt? Wann bekommt er den Betrag ausgezahlt?  (Antwort: Matthias bekommt Betrag B nach Z Tagen ausgezahlt.)    2. Lukas  gibt  an,  dass  er  bereit  ist,  X  Tage  auf  Betrag  B  zu  warten.  Die  danach  vom  Computer  generierte  Zufallszahl  Z  ist  größer  als  X.  Welchen  Betrag  bekommt  Lukas  ausgezahlt?  Wann  bekommt er den Betrag ausgezahlt?  (Antwort: Lukas bekommt Betrag A heute ausgezahlt.)    3. Luca  gibt  an,  dass  sie  bereit  ist,  X  Tage  auf  Betrag  B  zu  warten.  Die  danach  vom  Computer  generierte  Zufallszahl  Z  ist  genauso  groß  wie  X.  Welchen  Betrag  bekommt  Luca  ausgezahlt?  Wann bekommt sie den Betrag ausgezahlt?  (Antwort: Luca bekommt Betrag B in Z bzw. X Tagen ausgezahlt.)    4. Eva gibt an, dass Sie gerade noch X Tage bereit ist zu warten, um B zu erhalten. Welche Werte  darf  die  Zufallszahl  Z  annehmen,  damit  Eva  Betrag  B  erhält?  Nach  wie  vielen  Tagen  erhält  Eva  Betrag B?  (Antwort: Die Zufallszahl muss im Intervall [heute; X] liegen. Eva erhält Betrag B nach ZTagen.) 
  Bitte  füllen  Sie  anschließend  die  10  Fragen  nacheinander  aus.  Benutzen  Sie  keine  Bleistifte  und  vermeiden  Sie  Korrekturen,  da  wir  sonst  Ihre  Antworten  nicht  für  die  Auszahlung  berücksichtigen  können. Ebenso ist es nicht erlaubt, sich mit Kommilitonen in irgendeiner Form auszutauschen (z.B.  abzuschreiben).     Vielen Dank! 
64   

 
Fragen  Bitte geben Sie hier neben Name und Matrikelnummer auch Ihre Emailadresse an, damit ich  den zutreffenden Gutschein an Sie versenden kann. Selbstverständlich werde ich Ihre Daten  vollständig anonymisieren und streng vertraulich behandeln.  Name:   Matrikelnummer:   EmailAdresse:    Bitte füllen Sie nun die folgenden 10 Fragen nacheinander aus. Benutzen Sie keine Bleistifte  und  vermeiden  Sie  Korrekturen,  da  wir  sonst  Ihre  Antworten  nicht  für  die  Auszahlung  berücksichtigen  können.  Ebenso  ist  es  nicht  erlaubt,  sich  mit  Kommilitonen  in  irgendeiner  Form  auszutauschen  (z.B.  abschreiben).  Beantworten  Sie  eine  Frage  nach  der  anderen,  indem  Sie  jeweils  die  Lücke  ausfüllen.  Am  Ende  wird  genau  eine  Antwort  davon  auszahlungsrelevant sein.     F1: Für mich wäre 5 heute zu bekommen genauso gut, wie 15 in __ Tagen zu erhalten. 
F2: Für mich wäre 5 heute zu bekommen genauso gut, wie 10 in __ Tagen zu erhalten. 
F3: Für mich wäre 10 heute zu bekommen genauso gut, wie 20 in __ Tagen zu erhalten. 
F4: Für mich wäre 15 heute zu bekommen genauso gut, wie 25 in __ Tagen zu erhalten. 
F5: Für mich wäre 20 heute zu bekommen genauso gut, wie 25 in __ Tagen zu erhalten. 
F6: Für mich wäre 10 heute zu bekommen genauso gut, wie 15B in __ Tagen zu erhalten. 
F7: Für mich wäre 5 heute zu bekommen genauso gut, wie 25 in __ Tagen zu erhalten. 
F8: Für mich wäre 5 heute zu bekommen genauso gut, wie 20 in __ Tagen zu erhalten. 
F9: Für mich wäre 10 heute zu bekommen genauso gut, wie 25 in __ Tagen zu erhalten. 
F10: Für mich wäre 15 heute zu bekommen genauso gut, wie 20 in __ Tagen zu erhalten. 
   
65   

 

Instruktionen 

Teil 2: Umfrage 

In diesem Teil bitte ich Sie, an folgender Umfrage teilzunehmen. Selbstverständlich werde  ich Ihre Daten vollständig anonymisieren und streng vertraulich behandeln. 

D1. Name: ________________________________ 

D2. Matrikelnummer: ________________________________ 

D3. Haben Sie im Verlauf dieses Semesters mit Kommilitonen zusammen für diesen Kurs 

(Mikroökonomik I) gelernt?    

  Ja   

  Nein 

Lautet Ihre Antwort Ja, dann nennen Sie bitte die betreffenden Kommilitonen in der ersten  Spalte  der  folgenden  Tabelle  (D4).  Beantworten  Sie  bitte  für  jeden  der  genannten  Kommilitonen die folgenden drei Fragen in der Tabelle. Wenn Sie die Antwort nicht wissen,  geben Sie einfach eine Schätzung ab. 

D4: Vorname  und Name  des  Kommilitonen 
                                   
 

D5: Seit  wann  (ungefähr)  kennen Sie  sich  persönlich?  (Monat  und Jahr) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

D6: Wie viel Zeit  verbringen Sie im  Durchschnitt pro  Monat  miteinander  (außerhalb von  gemeinsam  besuchten Lehr veranstaltungen)?   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

D7: Welcher Anteil  D8: Welcher Anteil 

der gemeinsamen  der gemeinsamen 

Zeit aus D6 entfällt  Zeit aus D6 entfällt 

auf  auf 

Freizeitaktivitäten?    studiumsbezogene 

(in %) 

Aktivitäten (z. B. 

Lernen für diesen 

oder für andere 

Kurse)?    (in %) 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

66   

 

Im Folgenden werden Sie um Einschätzungen bezüglich verschiedener Gruppen von  Studierenden gebeten.  

 Die erste Gruppe sind die von Ihnen genannten Kommilitonen und werden als ,,Ihre  Lernpartner"  bezeichnet.  Falls  Sie  bei  D3  angegeben  haben,  keine  Lernpartner  zu  haben, dann müssen Sie diese Gruppe bei der folgenden Frage nicht berücksichtigen.  
 Die  zweite  Gruppe  besteht  aus  den  Kommilitonen  in  der  offiziellen  Übungsgruppe  (Tutorium),  in  der  sie  am  häufigsten  teilgenommen  haben,  und  wird  als  ,,Ihre  spateÜbungsgruppe"  bezeichnet.  Bitte  geben  Sie  hier  an,  in  welcher  offiziellen  Übungsgruppe  (Tutorium)  Sie  am  häufigsten  teilgenommen  haben?     Wochentag:__________  Uhrzeit:__________  Tutor:______________ 
 Die dritte Gruppe umfasst alle Studierenden, die an diesem Kurs (Mikroökonomik I)  teilnehmen. 
 Die vierte Gruppe umfasst in Deutschland Studierende ganz allgemein und bezieht  sich auf deren hypothetisches Verhalten, wenn sie diesen Kurs besuchen würden. 
Bitte geben Sie eine Einschätzung zu den folgenden Fragen in der Tabelle für jede Gruppe  der Studierenden.  

Gruppe von 

D9: Wie hoch ist 

D10: Wie hoch ist  D11: Abgesehen von 

Studierenden 

Ihrer Meinung nach  der Anteil der  Studierenden der 

Ihrer Meinung nach  der Anteil der  Studierenden der 

der Vorlesung und  von den offiziellen  Übungen, wie viel 

jeweiligen Gruppe,  jeweiligen Gruppe,  Zeit pro Woche hat 

die sich 

die die 

Ihrer Meinung nach 

unverbindlich dafür  Studienleistung zum  die jeweilige Gruppe 

angemeldet hatten,  früheren Termin 

durchschnittlich für 

die Studienleistung  abgegeben haben  diesen Kurs 

zum früheren Termin  (und dadurch 

(Mikroökonomik I) 

abzugeben?  

Feedback erhalten  gelernt? 

(in % der Gruppe) 

haben)?   (in % der Gruppe) 

(in Minuten) 

Ihre Lernpartner 

 

 

 

(falls D3: Ja) 

Ihre Übungsgruppe         

Alle Teilnehmer der        Veranstaltung 

Erwartetes Verhalten       

aller Studierenden in  Deutschland.  

 

D12: Bitte geben Sie hier die Note an, die Sie für die Klausur Mathematik für 

Volkswirtschaftslehre I  erhalten haben:____________     habe nicht teilgenommen 

D13. Abgesehen von der Vorlesung und den offiziellen Übungen, wie viel Zeit lernten Sie in 
den vergangenen sieben Tagen für diesen Kurs (Mikroökonomik I)? __________ Minuten
67   

 

Teil 3: Umfrage  

Instruktionen 

In  diesem  Teil  bitte  ich  Sie,  an  folgender  Umfrage  teilzunehmen.  Selbstverständlich  werde  ich  Ihre  Daten vollständig anonymisieren und streng vertraulich behandeln.  

E1. Name: ________________________________ 

E2. Matrikelnummer: ________________________________ 

  E3.  Wie  schätzen  Sie  sich  persönlich  ein:  Sind  Sie  im  Allgemeinen  ein  risikobereiter  Mensch  oder  versuchen Sie, Risiken zu vermeiden?    Bitte kreuzen Sie ein Kästchen auf der Skala an, wobei der Wert 0 bedeutet: ,,gar nicht risikobereit"  und  der  Wert  10:  ,,sehr  risikobereit".  Mit  den  Werten  dazwischen  können  Sie  Ihre  Einschätzung  abstufen.     Gar nicht                     sehr   risikobereit                    risikobereit 

 

   0       1    2  3  4  5         6           7           8            9          10 

 

 

E4. Man kann sich in verschiedenen Bereichen ja auch unterschiedlich verhalten. Wie würden Sie Ihre 

Risikobereitschaft in Bezug auf die folgenden Bereiche einschätzen? 

Bitte kreuzen Sie in jeder Zeile ein Kästchen auf der Skala an! 

 

Wie ist das ... 

Gar nicht                     sehr 

risikobereit                risikobereit 
 
               0       1        2        3         4        5         6   7         8          9       10 

  beim Autofahren? 

 

bei Geldanlagen? 

 

bei Freizeit/Sport? 
bei Ihrer beruflichen Karriere? 
bei Ihrer Gesundheit? 
beim Vertrauen in fremde   Menschen? 

       

 

68   

 

E5. Stellen Sie sich vor, dass Sie in einer Lotterie 100.000 Euro gewinnen. Unmittelbar nach Erhalt des  Gewinns bekommen Sie von einer angesehenen Bank ein Angebot für eine Geldanlage, die Folgendes  beinhaltet:  

Es gibt eine Chance, das Geld innerhalb von zwei Jahren zu verdoppeln. Es gibt aber auch eine gleich  hohe Wahrscheinlichkeit, die Hälfte des eingesetzten Geldes zu verlieren. Sie können das Geld ganz  oder teilweise in folgender Weise anlegen oder das Angebot ablehnen.  

Welchen  Teil  des  Lotteriegewinns  würden  Sie  für  die  einerseits  riskante,  andererseits  gewinnversprechende Geldanlage einsetzen? 

Den ganzen Betrag von 100.000 Euro.................................................................................................. 

Den Betrag von 80.000 Euro................................................................................................................... 

Den Betrag von 60.000 Euro.................................................................................................................. 

Den Betrag von 40.000 Euro.................................................................................................................. 

Den Betrag von 20.000 Euro.................................................................................................................. 

Überhaupt nichts, würde das Angebot ablehnen.............................................................................. 

 

E6. Inwiefern trifft folgenden Aussage auf Sie zu? ,,Wenn ich mir etwas vornehme, dann mache ich  das auch bis zum geplanten Zeitpunkt." 

Bitte  kreuzen  Sie  ein  Kästchen  auf  der  Skala  an,  wobei  der  Wert  0  bedeutet:  ,,die  Aussage  trifft  überhaupt  nicht  zu"  und  der  Wert  10:  ,,die  Aussage  stimmt  absolut  und  immer".  Mit  den  Werten  dazwischen können Sie Ihre Einschätzung abstufen.     überhaupt                     absolut   nicht                      immer 

 
   0       1    2  3  4  5         6           7           8            9          10   

 

Herzlichen Dank für Ihre Teilnahme ! 

 
 

 

 

69   

SFB 649 Discussion Paper Series 2014
For a complete list of Discussion Papers published by the SFB 649, please visit http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de.
001 "Principal Component Analysis in an Asymmetric Norm" by Ngoc Mai Tran, Maria Osipenko and Wolfgang Karl Härdle, January 2014.
002 "A Simultaneous Confidence Corridor for Varying Coefficient Regression with Sparse Functional Data" by Lijie Gu, Li Wang, Wolfgang Karl Härdle and Lijian Yang, January 2014.
003 "An Extended Single Index Model with Missing Response at Random" by Qihua Wang, Tao Zhang, Wolfgang Karl Härdle, January 2014.
004 "Structural Vector Autoregressive Analysis in a Data Rich Environment: A Survey" by Helmut Lütkepohl, January 2014.
005 "Functional stable limit theorems for efficient spectral covolatility estimators" by Randolf Altmeyer and Markus Bibinger, January 2014.
006 "A consistent two-factor model for pricing temperature derivatives" by Andreas Groll, Brenda López-Cabrera and Thilo Meyer-Brandis, January 2014.
007 "Confidence Bands for Impulse Responses: Bonferroni versus Wald" by Helmut Lütkepohl, Anna Staszewska-Bystrova and Peter Winker, January 2014.
008 "Simultaneous Confidence Corridors and Variable Selection for Generalized Additive Models" by Shuzhuan Zheng, Rong Liu, Lijian Yang and Wolfgang Karl Härdle, January 2014.
009 "Structural Vector Autoregressions: Checking Identifying Long-run Restrictions via Heteroskedasticity" by Helmut Lütkepohl and Anton Velinov, January 2014.
010 "Efficient Iterative Maximum Likelihood Estimation of HighParameterized Time Series Models" by Nikolaus Hautsch, Ostap Okhrin and Alexander Ristig, January 2014.
011 "Fiscal Devaluation in a Monetary Union" by Philipp Engler, Giovanni Ganelli, Juha Tervala and Simon Voigts, January 2014.
012 "Nonparametric Estimates for Conditional Quantiles of Time Series" by Jürgen Franke, Peter Mwita and Weining Wang, January 2014.
013 "Product Market Deregulation and Employment Outcomes: Evidence from the German Retail Sector" by Charlotte Senftleben-König, January 2014.
014 "Estimation procedures for exchangeable Marshall copulas with hydrological application" by Fabrizio Durante and Ostap Okhrin, January 2014.
015 "Ladislaus von Bortkiewicz - statistician, economist, and a European intellectual" by Wolfgang Karl Härdle and Annette B. Vogt, February 2014.
016 "An Application of Principal Component Analysis on Multivariate TimeStationary Spatio-Temporal Data" by Stephan Stahlschmidt, Wolfgang Karl Härdle and Helmut Thome, February 2014.
017 "The composition of government spending and the multiplier at the Zero Lower Bound" by Julien Albertini, Arthur Poirier and Jordan RoulleauPasdeloup, February 2014.
018 "Interacting Product and Labor Market Regulation and the Impact of Immigration on Native Wages" by Susanne Prantl and Alexandra SpitzOener, February 2014.
SFSBF6B4694, 9S,pSapnadnaduaeureSrtrSatßraeß1e, 1D,-D10-1107187B8eBrleinrlin htthpt:t/p/:/s/fbs6fb4694.w9.iwwiiw.hiu.h-bue-brleinrl.idne.de
ThTishrisesreasrecahrcwhaws assupsuppoprtoerdtebdybtyhethDeeDuetsucthseche ForFsocrhsuchnugnsgesgmeeminesicnhsachftatfht rtohuroguhgthhethSeFSBF6B4694"9Ec"oEnconmoimc RicisRki"s.k".

SFB 649 Discussion Paper Series 2014
For a complete list of Discussion Papers published by the SFB 649, please visit http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de.
019 "Unemployment benefits extensions at the zero lower bound on nominal interest rate" by Julien Albertini and Arthur Poirier, February 2014.
020 "Modelling spatio-temporal variability of temperature" by Xiaofeng Cao, Ostap Okhrin, Martin Odening and Matthias Ritter, February 2014.
021 "Do Maternal Health Problems Influence Child's Worrying Status? Evidence from British Cohort Study" by Xianhua Dai, Wolfgang Karl Härdle and Keming Yu, February 2014.
022 "Nonparametric Test for a Constant Beta over a Fixed Time Interval" by Markus Reiß, Viktor Todorov and George Tauchen, February 2014.
023 "Inflation Expectations Spillovers between the United States and Euro Area" by Aleksei Netsunajev and Lars Winkelmann, March 2014.
024 "Peer Effects and Students' Self-Control" by Berno Buechel, Lydia Mechtenberg and Julia Petersen, April 2014.
SFB 649, Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de
This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".

