BERLIN

SFB 6 4 9 E C O N O M I C R I S K

SFB 649 Discussion Paper 2015-011
Competitors In Merger Control: Shall They Be Merely Heard Or
Also Listened To?
Thomas Giebe* Miyu Lee**
*Technische Universität Berlin, Germany ** Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".
http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de ISSN 1860-5664
SFB 649, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin

Competitors In Merger Control: Shall They Be Merely Heard Or Also Listened To?1
Thomas Giebea,, Miyu Leeb
aTechnische Universität Berlin, Microeconomics, Sekr. H91, Str. des 17. Juni 135, 10623 Berlin, Germany, thomas.giebe@tu-berlin.de, phone: +493031425539 . bHumboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Competition Policy, Spandauer Str. 1, 10099 Berlin,
Germany, miyu.lee@staff.hu-berlin.de, phone: +493020935786 .
Abstract
There are legal grounds to hear competitors in merger control proceedings, and competitor involvement has gained significance. To what extent this is economically sensible is our question. The competition authority applies some welfare standard while the competitor cares about its own profit. In general, but not always, this implies a conflict of interest. We formally model this setting with cheap talk signaling games, where hearing the competitor might convey valuable information to the authority, but also serve the competitor's own interests. We find that the authority will mostly have to ignore the competitor but, depending on the authority's own prior information, strictly following the competitor's selfish recommendation will improve the authority's decision. Complementary to our analysis, we provide empirical data of competitor involvement in EU merger cases and give an overview of the legal discussion in the EU and US.
Keywords: merger control, antitrust, European Commission, signaling, efficiency, competitors, rivals JEL classification: G34, K21, L4, C73, L2.
February 25, 2015
1We thank Helmut Bester, Joseph Clougherty, Tomaso Duso, Radosveta IvanovaStenzel, Ulrich Kamecke, Matthias Lang, Claudia Salim, Jan-Peter Siedlarek, Roland Strausz, and the participants of the Mikroökonomisches Kolloquium of Humboldt University and Free University Berlin for helpful comments and discussion, Regine Hallmann for technical support, Matthias Menzel, Felix Bönisch and Tilman Fries for library and data assistance. This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through CRC 649 Economic Risk.
Corresponding author

1. Introduction
Both in the European Union (EU) and the U.S., competitors have gained significance in merger control proceedings. EU merger law presently entitles competitors to submit their views on the notified merger in writing and in a formal hearing before the European Commission (Commission) makes a final decision. Additionally, competitors have been increasingly involved in the Commission's fact-finding and market investigation process. In the U.S., competitors' claims were traditionally treated restrictively but both the Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission have recently started to widen the extent of competitor participation in merger proceedings by conducting an `open door' policy. These recent procedural developments in merger control have motivated us to explore potential policy deficiencies which might arise out of a conflict between legal due process and economic efficiency aspects: while, on the one hand, we have regulatory, procedural and practical reasons to take into account the competitors' opinions such as their legal right to be heard or the authority's past heavy reliance on third-party input resulting from its information deficit due to limited resources; on the other hand, from an efficiency standpoint, there is reason to believe that a certain degree of temptation exists on the part of the competitors to manipulate the authority so as to achieve a decision maximizing their own profits rather than total welfare. Our goal in this paper is twofold. First, we document the growing significance and the legal discussion of competitor involvement in merger proceedings in the EU and the U.S. This is complemented by empirical data of EU merger cases. Second, we introduce and analyze two tractable gametheoretical models for the strategic interaction between competitors and the competition authority. We employ cheap talk signaling games in which the competitor communicates with the authority. This communication is costless and non-binding and its content is not verifiable. It has no direct consequences but, depending on how it affects the authority's beliefs about the merger implications, it might reveal valuable information or it might be used to deceive the authority. The authority decides to either clear or block the merger based on its own information and the competitor's message. This includes the option to ignore the competitor's communication. Our two signaling models differ by the richness of the signaling language: In the first case the language is rich enough to communicate the full welfare
2

and profit implications of clearing the notified merger. In the second, the language is just rich enough to recommend to either block or clear the merger. We determine all perfect Bayesian pure- and mixed-strategy equilibria of the two signaling institutions. These turn out to be not substantially different between the two games. They can be partitioned into equilibria where the authority ignores the competitor's message and takes a decision based on its own information only, and equilibria where it implements the competitor's preferred decision. In the latter case, the authority's decision is always superior, by the welfare standard applied, as compared to a decision under ignorance of the competitor's message. The situations in which the authority should `listen' rather than `hear' are characterized by a sufficient expected alignment of interest. They can easily be identified from the authority's own information. Relevant legal and economic literature is mentioned throughout the paper. Section 2 discusses the legal background and the procedural aspects of hearing competitors' views; Section 3 describes the model and the games; Sections 4 and 5 present the pure- and mixed-strategy equilibria of the first signaling game, respectively. Section 6 contains the results for the second signaling game. Section 7 provides a discussion of the results as well as our policy recommendation. Section 8 concludes. The appendix contains contain all lemmas and proofs, and empirical data on EU merger cases.
2. Competitor Involvement in Merger Control
2.1. European Union
Competitor involvement in EU merger control is explicitly set forth in the European merger law provisions: Within 7­10 days after receiving a merger notification the Commission sends out Article 112 letters to the filing parties and `interested third parties'. The law defines the latter usually as being competitors, suppliers and customers.3 The so-called Article 11 letters' main purpose is to gather information on the market in Phase 1. The Best Practice Guidelines further set forth that the Commission may consult third parties on methodological issues regarding data and information
2Merger Regulation 139/2004. 3Art. 11(c) of the Regulation 802/2004 (Implementing Regulation) implementing the Merger Regulation 139/2004, i.e., setting forth details on notifications, time limits, and hearings.
3

gathering in the relevant economic sector.4 Third parties showing sufficient interest may request in Phase 1 to be heard orally.
In Phase 2, the Commission sends to the involved third parties a nonconfidential version of the Statement of Objections5 after which the third parties have the right to express their view in writing or orally in a formal hearing.6
Finally, the Commission states in its Best Practice Guidelines that it welcomes any individual submission apart from direct replies from questionnaires where third parties provide `information and comments' considered relevant for the merger assessment. It may also invite those parties for meetings to discuss or clarify such issues further.7
The prevailing view among scholars and practitioners is that in most cases, the Commission will lack the internal market expertise upon receiving a notification, thereby granting a `considerable scope' of comment to and relying heavily on the information provided by the third parties.8 Hearing Officers Durande and Williams of the Cabinet of the Commissioner agree that although the right for a formal hearing may in principle be denied by the Commission, the rights of the `other involved third parties' which includes competitors must be considered as being much closer to those of a defendant in terms of procedural guarantees.9
2.2. U.S. The U.S. have been traditionally more reserved in granting rights to competitors in merger proceedings. The responsible authorities, the U.S. Department of Justice (DoJ) and the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), took the view that competitors were more likely to complain about mergers which would render the market more competitive post merger.10 To competitors who tried to challenge a merger by way of an injunction11 or sue for dam-
4Best Practices on the conduct of EC merger control proceedings 2004, para 28. 5Art. 16(1) Implementing Regulation. 6Art. 16 and 18 Implementing Regulation. 7para. 35. 8Van Bael & Bellis (2005, p. 861); Cleary Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton (2004, p. 4). 9as compared to rights of a complainant in antitrust matters. See Durande and Williams (2005, p. 22). 10Diesenhaus (1987, p. 2059); Van Arsdall and Piehl (2014). 11Sec. 16 Clayton Act, 15 U.S.C. § 26.
4

ages, the Supreme Court usually denied standing to the competitors.12
However, while the DoJ and FTC were once resistant to hear competitors in pending merger proceedings, the practice has markedly changed in recent years. The most prominent case was AT&T Inc.'s contemplated acquisition of T-Mobile USA, Inc. in 2011.13 Competitors Sprint Nextel and Cellular South opposed the merger and the agencies supported their efforts in gaining access to the documents relating to the merger.14 After their strong objections which were also supported by the U.S. and several states, AT&T ultimately abandoned its efforts to acquire T-Mobile USA.
Given the recent shift in the agencies' stance towards competitors, practitioners in the U.S. have become conscious about the `right strategy' competitors could take in merger proceedings, stating that the bigger role in merger review `necessitates an additional layer of planning and strategy'.15
2.3. Legal and Strategic Considerations in Competitor Involvement Apart from information-gathering purposes, the involvement of competitors as set forth by EU laws is partly motivated by the legal principle of granting anyone the right to be heard before an individual measure which would affect such person adversely is taken16 and partly by due process considerations. Legislators and legal scholars might have taken the view upon drafting the rules that the competitors would always report truthfully to the deciding agency. A competitor raising serious doubts about a merger would thus be a reason to view the merger more critically.
While the competitors' right to be heard can be seen as a softer version of the usual rights of defense,17 practice shows that their participation is crucial if not essential in merger proceedings, as their involvement in Phase 2 proceedings shows:
12Cargill v. Monfort of Colorado, Inc., 107 S.Ct. 484 (1986). 13AT&T Inc., Description of Transaction, Public Interest Showing and Related Demonstrations, WT Docket No. 11-65 at 1, FCC filed April 21, 2011. 14See detailed case discussion in Hundt (2011); Stucke and Grunes (2012, p. 196). 15Van Arsdall and Piehl (2014, p. 2). 16Art. 41 Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union. 17Durande and Williams (2005, p. 23).
5

We have looked into all Phase 2 proceedings between 1990 and 2013 and identified those cases where competitors were given the opportunity to voice their opinions.18 As can be seen in Figure 1 which plots the ratio between competitor participation and Phase 2 cases, competitor involvement has radically increased since the reform and the ratio has stayed continuously at 1. One can assume presently that all Phase 2 proceedings will entail the involvement of competitors, whereas in the past that was not necessarily the case.
Figure 1: Competitor participation as a share of Phase 2 cases, EU, 1990­2013
We have further plotted the ratio of competitor objections to only those Phase 2 cases where competitors have been involved for the years from 1997 until 2013, see Figure 2. In other words, only those instances were captured where competitors had a negative opinion on the merger proposed. As can be seen, competitors have been increasingly voicing concerns in the past years. Could it be because competitors have realized the strategic potential in merger proceedings or because more competition-enhancing mergers have been notified in the past years which did not find the competitors' approval? In any case, scholars and practitioners now agree that competitors' opinions in merger proceedings shall be viewed with skepticism (see, e.g., Motta, 2004, p. 240). The Commission has recently proceeded to add in its decisions a footnote saying that information furnished by third parties will not
18See Appendix B for additional empirical data.
6

Figure 2: Competitor objections as a share of Phase 2 cases with competitor involvement, EU, 1997­2013
be taken at face value since `the opinion provided might be biased to influence [its] decision-making process.' The footnote further states that the Commission will thus analyze competitors' opinions very carefully as they `might have an interest in making the transaction of their competitors [...] more difficult[...]'.19
The FTC stated already 25 years ago in an amicus brief that competitors `stand to benefit from, and have no incentive to challenge, acquisitions that may lead to supracompetitive pricing. [They] have a substantial incentive to challenge acquisitions that will make their rivals more efficient, make their industry more competitive, and reduce the prices they can charge their customers. [...] [Competitors must be] prevented from using the antitrust laws for anticompetitive purposes.'20
At the same time, the authorities are by definition market outsiders and must to some extent rely on the information provided by market insiders. They further face time and cost constraints which make it even more difficult to assess the state of a market or to anticipate the implication of a
19See for example the decision in Ryanair/Aer Lingus III, M.6663, Feb. 27, 2013, para 28, footnote 18.
20Brief for the United States and the Federal Trade Commission as Amici Curiae, Cargill v. Monfort.
7

proposed merger on the market. Once competitors are playing a role in the market assessment, however, there is a potential risk for strategic abuse of the legal possibility to express their opinions by sending distorted signals to the authorities in order to promote their own interests (Motta, 2004, p. 240).
It has long been recognized that mergers generally exhibit a tradeoff between market power effects that tend to reduce welfare, and synergy effects that might increase welfare. For the competitors, the market power effect is supposed to be profit-increasing, as they can free-ride on the merging firms' output reduction, while synergy effects tend to reduce prices and therefore hurt the competitors' profits (see, e.g., Stigler, 1950, Williamson, 1968, Perry and Porter, 1985). For a given notified merger, it is difficult to say to what extent the competitors' and the authority's interests are aligned because both, the market power effect and some synergy effects, can be expected to be present in most mergers (Duso et al., 2011, p. 985). Moreover, there is a large theoretical and empirical literature on mergers reporting very diverse effects with respect to welfare as well as insider and outsider profits depending on which aspects are relevant for a given merger. Examples of such aspects are collusion (Miller and Weinberg, 2014), quantity vs. price competition (Salant et al., 1983, Deneckere and Davidson, 1985), synergies (Banerjee and Eckard, 1998, Farrell and Shapiro, 2001), integration cost (Huck et al., 2004), internal capital-allocation (Mialon, 2008), strategic market power (Huck et al., 2001), internal conflict (Banal-Estañol et al., 2008), managerial incentives (Faulí-Oller and Motta, 1996, Kräkel and Müller, 2014), managerial synergies (Matsusaka, 1993), entry and exit (Davidson and Mukherjee, 2007), managerial hubris (Roll, 1986), technology (Lahiri and Ono, 1988), firm-internal competition (Creane and Davidson, 2004), multi-market presence (Werden et al., 1991), learning (Vermeulen and Barkema, 2001), union organization (Lommerud et al., 2001) or uncertainty (Amir et al., 2009). See Datta et al. (1992) for a meta-analysis. Neven and Röller (2002) recall that, based on standard oligopoly models, just by varying the degree of cost efficiencies we can get very diverse merger implications with respect to outsider profits, consumer surplus and total welfare. Banerjee and Eckard (1998) and Clougherty and Duso (2009) present empirical evidence for both a post-merger increase as well as a decrease of outsider profits. Mergers might be unprofitable for both insiders and outsiders. This might happen in declining industries, when preemption
8

is the motivation for mergers (Fridolfsson and Stennek, 2005). Heubeck et al. (2006, p. 38) demonstrate how a merger can be desirable for both the competitor and the authority: Suppose the more efficient firm in a market is an outside firm and the merging firms do not realize any cost efficiencies. Then average marginal costs in the market might fall because the less efficient merged firm produces less than before, whereas the more efficient outsider will produce a larger share of the smaller total output. In spite of rising prices, total welfare might then rise.
3. Model
In this section, we start with discussing the modeling of merger types. Then we motivate the use of signaling games before formally introducing them.
3.1. Merger Types
The starting point of our model is the fact that clearing a proposed merger has implications for the competitor's profits () and for welfare (W ), as measured by the welfare standard applied. We shall neglect the impact on the merging firms' profits because merging firms will not strategically interact with competitors or the authority in our games.2122 We assume that the authorities posit a welfare standard for their merger decisions and that competitor firms operate as profit-maximizers. For our analysis, it does not matter whether the authority, say, applies a total or a consumer welfare standard. Denote by  and W the change in the competitor's profit, resp. welfare, due to clearing a given merger, while blocking the merger preserves the status quo which is associated with `no change'. Ignoring the possibility that a merger has no implications whatsoever, the authority's decision to clear a merger will either imply a welfare increase (W > 0) or decrease (W < 0),
21We do not include the merging firms as strategic players in the model as we study the institution of `hearing the competitor' and we assume that insiders, by notifying the merger, have expressed a clear interest in getting the merger cleared. In this sense, any signals they might send to the authority will be unequivocally directed towards a clearing decision.
22Most of the merger literature focusses on the merging firms' profits and neglects the competitor. Event studies emphasize the different implications for the acquirer and the target. There are some exceptions, see, e.g. the taxonomy of mergers, proposed by Clougherty and Duso (2011, p.314). They distinguish between four merger types, depending on the merging firms' as well as the competitors' post merger profits.
9

as compared to the status quo, while the competitor's profit will either increase ( > 0) or decrease ( < 0). Combining the above, we can assign each merger to one of four types. Obviously, this covers all conceivable merger types regardless of their practical relevance. This case distinction allows us to separate the merger types where the authority's and the competitor's interests are aligned (both welfare and profit change in the same direction, up or down) from those that involve a conflict of interest, while observing the direction of the individual changes in each case. In our model, each of the four merger types has a prior probability derived from the authority's own information on the given notified merger. The practical relevance of a given merger type is immaterial for our formal analysis, as we solve our games for all distributions of prior probabilities that the authority might attach to the merger at hand. Moreover, it is irrelevant what the reasons for the welfare and profit changes are (see the discussion in the subsection 2.3). For simplicity, we represent each merger type by a combination of , W  {-1, 1}, modeling the direction in which a clearance decision would alter welfare and the competitor's profit. This is, naturally, a very simplifying assumption. However, it allows us to keep the analysis straightforward and get clear results while still tackling the relevant strategic issues and preserving the basic interplay between conflict of interest and interest alignment. Apart from that, it might already be a challenging task in practice to place a given merger correctly within our four-type model. From a policy perspective, it might also not be practicable to analyze a more general model where  and W are distributed on a finer grid, as this would require the authority to attach probabilities to each of the many types.
3.2. Signaling Game
We set out to capture the characteristic interaction between the competitor(s) and the competition authority, taking into account the information available to each side and each party's interests. We want to study the economic implications of an existing (legal) institution, rather than design an (optimal) institution.23
23Lagerlöf and Heidhues (2005) study the interaction between the authority and merger insiders. They derive optimal merger control institutions in order to induce merger insiders to invest into the production of hard evidence about efficiency gains. Milgrom and Roberts (1986) discuss on a general level the problem of a decision maker who has to rely on the information of (and competition between) better-informed parties. Any information revealed is assumed to be verifiable.
10

Our games start after a merger has been notified.24 Therefore, the profit and welfare implications of clearing this particular merger are given. The competitor, as a market insider, is assumed to know the merger type. The authority does not know the merger type, but it independently gathers information and tries to predict the consequences of the notified merger before making a decision.25 In the model, this information is represented by the distribution of prior probabilities of merger types. We further assume that the competitor, before making its statement, has an idea of the authority's prior information, through press releases, communication with the authority and, especially in the EU, the Statement of Objections. Therefore, we treat the authority's prior information as common knowledge. Combining its prior information with the information inferred from the competitor's statement, the authority either prohibits (blocks) or clears the notified merger. For simplicity, we leave out the option of a clearance decision with remedies.26 We have found cheap talk signaling games to be the most appealing approach to capture the procedural and informational features of merger review.27 The information submitted by the competitor is itself costless and has no direct consequences. It can only indirectly affect payoffs if it succeeds in altering the authority's perception (i.e., beliefs) of the situation sufficiently to affect the decision. In particular, the competitor can neither commit to tell the truth nor can lying be detected or has any cost. The difficulty for the authority in responding to the competitor's communication
24This might be any type of merger. The set of notified mergers can be seen as endogenous to the merger policy, see, e.g., Sørgard (2009) or Nocke and Whinston (2010).
25In practice, also the competitor faces some uncertainty about merger implications. Therefore, we can understand the payoffs in our games as (discounted) expected values. See, e.g., Cunha et al. (2014) for an explicit treatment of uncertain efficiency gains.
26Vasconcelos (2010) provides a theoretical treatment of remedies in an oligopoly model. We also leave out potential litigation following a decision. Gürtler and Kräkel (2009a) analyze litigation incentives depending on the type of takeover. Litigation cost are a separate source of inefficiencies which are typically neglected in the welfare analysis of takeovers, see Gürtler and Kräkel (2009b).
27The basic distinction in signaling games is between costly signals that directly affect payoffs (as, e.g., in the famous job market signaling of Spence, 1973) and signaling where the signal itself is `cheap', i.e., costless, but might affect beliefs and, therefore, indirectly, payoffs (e.g., Farrell and Rabin, 1996, Krishna and Morgan, 2008 ). Signaling games have been successfully applied to many contexts, see, e.g., Riley (2001) and Connelly et al. (2011). Crawford (1998) surveys experimental evidence on the working of cheap talk communication.
11

therefore lies in the fact that it is not verifiable. Therefore, the authority must try to gauge the informational content of the competitor's statement, taking into account its own information and the fact that the competitor's interest need not, but can, coincide with the authority's.

We now formally set up a signaling game, i.e., a sequential game with players S (also referred to as sender or competitor) and R (also referred to as receiver or authority), and a non-strategic player nature. The timing, actions and information in this game are as follows:

1. Nature draws the merger type ti  T = {t1, t2, t3, t4} with corresponding prior probabilities pi := Pr{ti} > 0 where tiT pi = 1.28
2. S observes ti and chooses a message mj  M = {mA, mB, mC, mD}. We refer to S's actions synonymously as reports or recommendations. The message set contains as many elements as there are merger types. Therefore, in principle (though not necessarily in equilibrium), the merger type can perfectly be communicated.
3. R observes mj but does not observe ti, and chooses a decision dk  D = {dP , dC}, i.e. the decision either prohibits or clears the merger.
4. Payoffs U R(ti, dk) and U S(ti, dk) are realized, where



U R(ti,

dk)

=

Wi 0

if dk = dC , if dk = dP

U S(ti,

dk)

=

i 0

ti  T, (W1, W2, W3, W4) = (-1, 1, 1, -1), (1, 2, 3, 4) = (1, 1, -1, -1).

if dk = dC , if dk = dP (1)

Hence, there is a conflict of interest for types 1 and 3, whereas for types 2 and 4 both the competitor and the authority prefer the same decision (clearance for type 2 and blocking for type 4).

In order to simplify the presentation of mixed-strategy equilibria, we exclude certain non-generic constellations of the four prior probabilities of merger types. This rules out that indifference between actions is caused by the configuration of the priors rather than strategic decisions. Moreover, these assumptions imply a unique default decision (see next subsection).

28We assume strictly positive prior probabilities for each type in order to simplify the
analysis. This is not a restrictive assumption as these probabilities can be arbitrarily
small.
12

In words, we assume that no two prior probabilities are equal, nor are there sums of two (resp. three) prior probabilities that are equal to the sum of the other two prior probabilities (resp. the remaining prior probability). These assumptions are not restrictive. Prior probabilities can be arbitrarily close to the excluded values. Formally,

Assumption 1. For any pair of merger types ti and tj, we assume that pi = pj, pi = 1/2 and pi + pj = 1/2.

3.3. Default Decision
We define ddefault as the authority's optimal decision under complete ignorance of S's reports, for a given prior probability distribution of merger types. Absent any signals by S, it is optimal for R to implement the decision that implies a higher expected welfare, based on R's priors. In particular, the notified merger should be cleared (dC) if the merger is more likely to be welfare-improving rather than welfare-decreasing, i.e., p2 + p3 > p1 + p4, and prohibited (dP ) otherwise. Therefore, the default decision is


ddefault = dC if p2 + p3 > p1 + p4, dP otherwise.

(2)

The corresponding expected welfare (change) is


E[W |ddefault] =  tiT piWi if ddefault = dC , 0 otherwise,

= -p1 + p2 + p3 - p4 > 0 if p2 + p3 > p1 + p4, 0 otherwise.

(3)

4. Pure-Strategy Equilibria
A pure strategy of S is a function m(ti), ti  T , a pure strategy of R is a function d(mj), mj  M. Conditional on observing message mj  M, R's belief about the merger type is denoted by the probability distribution µji := Pr{ti|mj}  0, ti  T . Denote by Tx  T the set of merger types for which S sends the message mx  M in any given equilibrium (candidate). Thus, TA, TB, TC and TD together are a partitioning of the type set.
13

Our equilibrium concept is pure-strategy perfect Bayesian equilibrium. Therefore, in addition to the above belief system, we require that R's decision dk  D is payoff-maximizing, i.e, the optimal decision d(mj) conditional on observing message mj satisfies

d(mj)  arg max dk D

µijU R(ti, dk).
ti T

(4)

Similarly, S's message mj  M must be optimal, given the observed type ti and Rs optimal choice d(mj), i.e., the optimal message m(ti) satisfies

m(ti)  arg max U S(ti, d(mj)). mj M

(5)

Finally, for each message mj  M that is played by S on the equilibrium path, R's beliefs on the information set corresponding to mj must follow from Bayes' rule and S's strategy. Formally, for each message mj  M for which there is a type ti  T with m(ti) = mj (or, equivalently, Tj = ),

µji =

pi
ts Tj

ps .

(6)

An equilibrium is denoted by the players' complete strategies and R's consistent belief system.

{m(ti) ti  T }, {d(mj) mj  M }, {µji ti  T, mj  M } (7)

We constructively derive all pure-strategy equilibria. Equilibrium candidates can be distinguished by S's strategy (mi, mj, mk, ml), where the first entry is the message sent if the merger type is t1, the second for merger type t2 etc. and mi, mj, mk, ml  M . The analysis of equilibria can be simplified substantially as follows.29 The
informational content of each pure strategy of S corresponds to a partitioning of the type set. For instance, the pure strategy (mA, mB, mA, mA) partitions the type set into TA  {t1, t3, t4} and TB = {t2}. In words, the merger type 2 is fully revealed in this candidate whereas the other three types are bunched together by sending the same message for all of
them. As a consequence, the pure strategy (mA, mB, mA, mA) has the same

29As there are four messages available for each merger type, we have 44 = 256 purestrategy equilibrium candidates.
14

informational content as (mD, mB, mD, mD) and will implement the same equilibrium decision.30 By the above, the pure-strategy equilibrium candidates can conveniently be distinguished by their informational content, i.e., the form of the partitioning of the type set T they induce. This results in five classes of equilibrium candidates which we formally analyze in Lemmas 1 to 5 in the appendix. Using mw, mx, my, mz  M (resp. ti, tj, tk, tl  T ) to denote arbitrary and different messages (resp. merger types) these classes of equilibrium candidates are
(A) Exactly one message is played on the equilibrium path, i.e., S's strategies have the form Tx = T , Tw = Ty = Tz = . (Lemma 1)
(B) Exactly two messages are played on the equilibrium path, whereby one of the messages is sent for three types, i.e., S's strategies are described by Tx = {ti, tj, tk}, Ty = {tl} and Tw = Tz = . (Lemma 2)
(C) Exactly two messages are played on the equilibrium path, whereby each message is sent for two types, respectively. These strategies have the form Tx = {ti, tj}, Ty = {tk, tl} and Tw = Tz = . (Lemma 3)
(D) Exactly three messages are played on the equilibrium path. These strategies have the form Tx = {ti, tj}, Ty = {tk}, Tz = {tl} and Tw = . (Lemma 4)
(E) Exactly four messages are played on the equilibrium path. These strategies have the form Tw = {ti}, Tx = {tj}, Ty = {tk} and Tz = {tl}. (Lemma 5)
Applying this classification, we describe and explain our findings in the following, while the Appendix contains the lemmas and proofs. These proofs constructively derive all equilibria in pure strategies.
(A) There are uninformative equilibria (Lemma 1) in which S always sends the same message, not revealing any information, and therefore R optimally implements the default decision. This equilibrium is supported by R's beliefs such that after any (other) message the default is the
30In the signaling literature, this is referred to as inessential multiplicity of signaling languages, see, e.g., Crawford (1998). We distinguish only the essentially different equilibrium candidates.
15

correct decision. Given this, S is indifferent and therefore cannot do better than always send the same message.
(B) There are equilibria (Lemma 2), in which S reveals one of the types `truthfully' by sending a certain message exclusively for that type. S sends a second message for all other types, so these types cannot be distinguished from each other by the message. In these equilibria, the default decision is implemented.
In principle, the authority has two options. First, R might ignore the messages and implement the default. This is indeed the best response and constitutes an equilibrium for certain constellations of R's prior information. More precisely, R always implements the welfare-optimal decision for the single revealed type. Therefore, ignoring S's message can only be an equilibrium, if R's optimal decision is the same for that single type and for the group of three mergers represented by the second message. If, however, the optimal decisions corresponding to the two messages are different, then there is no equilibrium where the authority ignores S's message.
Second, the authority might block the merger after one of the messages and clear it after observing the other message. Then S can manipulate the decision whenever this increases S's profit. As three of the types carry the same message and therefore the same decision, for one of those three types S must have an incentive to deceive the authority. This is because, intuitively, for every decision of the authority, there are exactly two types for which S likes the decision, whereas for the other two types, S prefers the opposite decision. Thus, no equilibrium exists in which R's decision is conditional on S's message.
(C) There are equilibria (Lemma 3) in which S reveals a pair of types one of which is the true type. There are two classes of equilibria here.
First, R's optimal decision might be the same for each pair of types. This happens if each of the pairs contains a type with positive and with negative welfare change due to clearance, and within each pair, the expected welfare change must has the same sign. Given this, S cannot do better than send messages in this way, and R implements the default decision.
Second, R's optimal decisions after each message might be different. But then, S can pick the preferred decision by sending the appropriate
16

message. This is indeed an equilibrium, provided that R's and S's interests are aligned in a certain way: R's best response must coincide with S's preferred decision. We call this the `selfish' equilibrium.
(D) There is no equilibrium in which S sends exactly three messages. The intuition is as follows. If S sends three messages, then two types are revealed perfectly. For these two types, R's best response can either be the same or different. Suppose it is the same, e.g., dC. Then for one of those types (e.g. t2 and t3), there is a conflict of interest, so S deviates to the third message, because there R's best response must be the other decision, dP . Now suppose R's decision is different after for the two revealed types. This only works if S reveals the two types for which there is no conflict of interest (i.e. t2 and t4; otherwise S or R have an incentive to deviate). But for the remaining two types (i.e. t1 and t3), R is supposed to implement the same decision (following the third message), while S prefers different decisions for them, so S can profitably deviate to another message for one of the remaining types.
(E) The game does not have equilibria in which all four messages are played. The intuition is simple: If each type is associated with a unique message, then all types are perfectly revealed and R's best response is to implement the first-best decision in each case. But for two of the types there is a conflict of interest, so S would deviate to a message that implements the opposite decision.
We discuss these results in section 7.
5. Mixed-Strategy Equilibria
In this section, we discuss the game's perfect Bayesian equilibria in mixed strategies. A mixed strategy means any strategy where S randomizes (i.e. mixes) between at least two messages for at least one type, or a strategy where R mixes between decisions after at least one message on the equilibrium path. We constructively derive all mixed-strategy equilibria in a series of lemmas in the appendix. While the model and game remain the same as before, we introduce new notation for mixed strategies. Denote the probability that S
17

sends message mx for type ti by31

p~ix = Pr{mx|ti}  [0, 1], ti  T, mx  M,

p~ix = 1.

mxM

(8)

A complete strategy of S is therefore given by 16 probabilities p~ix for all type­message combinations. Similarly, denote the probability that R clears the merger (dC) after observing message mx by p~xC:32

p~xC = Pr{dC|mx}  [0, 1], mx  M.

(9)

As there are only two decisions, a complete strategy of R can be represented
by four clearance probabilities p~Cx , corresponding to the four messages mx  M. Therefore, a mixed-strategy equilibrium is formally characterized by

{p~ix, mx  M, ti  T }, {p~xC, mx  M }, {µxi , ti  T, mx  M } . (10)

We partition the mixed-strategy equilibrium candidates as follows.

(I) S plays a pure strategy and R a mixed strategy (Lemma 6).

(II) S plays a mixed strategy and R a pure strategy, always implementing the same decision regardless of the message (Lemma 7).

(III) S plays a mixed strategy and R a pure strategy, implementing different decisions depending on the message (Lemma 8).

(IV) Both S and R play a mixed strategy (Lemma 9).
The lemmas and proofs are in the appendix. The proofs constructively derive all mixed-strategy equilibria. Our findings can be described as follows.

(I) There is no mixed-strategy equilibrium in which S plays a pure strategy. This is because given any pure strategy of S, R's best response is entirely based on prior probabilities and the corresponding expected welfare. So R cannot be indifferent, by Assumption 1.

(II) There are mixed-strategy equilibria in which R implements the default decision independent of the message. This makes S indifferent between messages, so S is willing to mix (using two, three or four messages). In turn, as long as S's mixed strategy is such that the default decision remains a best response (given updated beliefs), we have an equilibrium.

31In this notation, the pure strategy m(ti) = mA is now denoted as p~Ai = 1.
32In this notation, the pure strategy d(mA) = dP is now denoted as p~AC = 0.
18

(III) There are mixed-strategy equilibria in which R implements a messagedependent decision. The equilibrium decisions are always S's preferred decisions because otherwise S would deviate to a message that implements the preferred decision. As several messages implement the same decision, S is indifferent between these messages, respectively, and is therefore willing to mix. In equilibrium, we only require that R's best response remains to implement S's selfish decisions.
(IV) There are no equilibria in which both S and R play a mixed strategy. The intuition for this result is not obvious.
Based on prior probabilities, R always favors one decision over the other, say dC because the merger is more likely to be welfare-increasing. So in order to make R indifferent between decisions after all messages, S must send each message less often for welfare-increasing types and each message more often for welfare-decreasing types.33 But this is impossible, because mixing probabilities for a given type must add up to one across all messages. The total mixing probability mass for welfare-increasing types is the same as that for welfare-decreasing types.
Having established that R will not mix after all messages, R must necessarily play a pure decision after at least one message. But this decision is preferred by S for two types (one of them welfare-increasing, the other welfare-decreasing), so S will not mix for these types, but send the message that gives the certain and preferred decision. As S is supposed to play mixed, this can be done only for the remaining two types. But now the same argument as above applies: For the remaining types, R favors one decision, by the prior probabilities, and one type must necessarily be welfare-increasing and the other welfare-decreasing. Again, S cannot make R indifferent after all messages because the total mixing probability mass is the same for welfare-increasing and welfare-decreasing types, but in order to make R indifferent S would need to put more weight in total on one of the types, which is impossible.
We discuss these results in section 7.
33In order to see this, suppose S sends each of the four messages with equal probability. Then R does not learn anything and dC remains strictly optimal.
19

6. A Two-Message Institution
In the previous sections, we have studied a signaling institution where the authority's hearing of the competitor permits four messages, i.e, in principle, communication of the merger type. Based on the results we have derived so far, we can study a second institution, where the authority restricts the message space to two messages only, M = {mA, mB}. Intuitively, this can be understood as simply asking for the competitor's recommendation to either clear or block the merger. Apart from the message set, the model and game are otherwise unchanged, as is the default decision. In the following, we explain how our results for pure- and mixed-strategy equilibria of the four-message game apply to the two-message game.
6.1. Pure-Strategy Equilibria of the Two-Message Game Obviously, as there are now two available messages, only cases (A) to (C) of our case distinction apply. The results of Lemmas 1 to 3 apply directly. The only changes concern off-equilibrium messages: In Lemma 1, there is now only one instead of three off-equilibrium messages. In Lemmas 2 and 3, there is no off-equilibrium message, so we do not need supporting beliefs. Therefore, in the two-message game, we still have either the default decision in equilibrium, or the `selfish' equilibrium that implements S's preferred decision. Existence conditions are unchanged.
6.2. Mixed-Strategy Equilibria of the Two-Message Game Given that there are only two available messages now, both messages necessarily have to be played on the equilibrium path in any mixed-strategy equilibrium. In the following we refer to the case distinction (I) - (IV) of the four-message game.
(I) Lemma 6 shows that there are no mixed-strategy equilibria where S plays a pure strategy. The proof is based on the fact that R is never indifferent after S's pure play. This also applies here.
(II) Lemma 7 shows that there are equilibria that implement the default decision. The proof explicitly includes the case of two messages played in equilibrium. We only need to leave out the discussion of off-equilibrium messages (there are none).
20

(III) The proof of Lemma 8 explicitly shows (in case a)) that there is no equilibrium for the case of two equilibrium messages. The argument applies directly.
(IV) Lemma 9 shows that there is no equilibrium where both S and R play a mixed strategy. The case a) of the proof explicitly covers the case of two messages.
Summarizing, the two-message game has a continuum of mixed-strategy equilibria, but they always implement the default decision. In particular, there are no `selfish' equilibria here, similar to those shown for the fourmessage game in Lemma 8. These equilibria require the use of four messages on the equilibrium path. We discuss these results in the following section.
7. Discussion and Policy Recommendation
Combining the results for the four- and the two-message games, we distinguish two classes of equilibria (including pure- and mixed-strategy equilibria): All equilibria implement either the default decision or the competitor's preferred decision, with certainty, respectively. There is no equilibrium in which the authority plays a mixed-strategy. Only the competitor ever mixes between messages. In any mixed equilibrium, S's strategies are `close to' the pure strategies of a corresponding pure-strategy equilibrium, such that R's pure best response is the same as in the corresponding pure-strategy equilibrium. The basic intuition for pure-strategy equilibria is as follows. The authority has two options. First, it might just ignore the competitor's message. Then the default decision is taken, and any message by S is a best response. Second, it might act on the message. This is equivalent to saying that the authority makes its decision conditional on the message observed. Thus, it takes a specific decision after observing a certain (subset of the) feasible message(s), while taking the opposite decision conditional on observing the remaining message(s). But given this reaction of the authority, the competitor can basically control the authority's decision by sending (one of) the message(s) after which the authority implements S's preferred decision. Therefore, a message-contingent decision can only occur in equilibrium if the authority intends to directly implement the competitor's preferred decision anyway. We conclude that either the authority must ignore the message, or it must implement the competitor's preferred decision in equilibrium.
21

The intuition for the selfish mixed-strategy equilibria is similar to that for the selfish pure-strategy equilibria. The (insubstantial) difference is that the competitor mixes between pairs of messages, but the messages within a pair have the same meaning in equilibrium, i.e., two messages recommend to block the merger, while the other two recommend a clearance decision. In this sense, two of the messages are redundant. This explains why there is no selfish mixed-strategy equilibrium in the two-message game: This equilibrium requires four messages. All other mixed-strategy equilibria implement the default decision. The intuition here is that, given that R implements the default, S is indifferent between messages and there is a range of (pure and mixed) strategies that leave R's best response unchanged. The range of mixed strategies is larger the more certain R's default decision goes in one or the other direction. We have shown that the four-message game does not have pure-strategy equilibria in which more than two messages are played. Moreover, whenever more than two messages are used in mixed-strategy equilibria, then several messages have the same meaning, making the additional messages inconsequential and redundant. Thus, the competitor strategically conceals information by choosing a `crude' language.34 Intuitively, using more than two (essentially different) messages reveals too much information to the authority, from the point of view of the competitor. Then the conflict of interest becomes payoff-relevant too often. In order to prevent this, S either does not reveal any information (or only so much that the default decision remains R's best response), or if interests are sufficiently aligned, S reveals carefully tailored information to R. In the selfish equilibrium, the information revealed ensures that S's preferred decision is taken, while preventing R from finding out the actual merger type. In general terms, our results are in line with the theoretical literature on cheap talk signaling (e.g., Crawford and Sobel (1982)) as follows. Although we assume that the competitor knows the merger type, there is, given the authority's uncertainty, neither a pure conflict of interest, nor are interests completely opposed. Because of this, we can expect to find equilibria in which the competitor's information is partially revealed. However, this only happens if interests are sufficiently aligned, which is the case whenever the selfish equilibrium exists. Due to the potential conflict of interest, there cannot be full information revelation. Similarly, alignment of interest is
34The nature of this result is well-known in the cheap talk literature, see Crawford and Sobel (1982).
22

insufficient for many prior distributions, which results in the default decision in equilibrium. In some of these equilibria that implement the default, there is some information transmission. However, the competitor carefully reveals only so much information that the default decision remains a best response. In this sense, the information revealed is inconsequential and its revelation does not hurt the competitor. In order to prepare a policy recommendation, we establish the payoff superiority of the selfish equilibria.

Proposition 1. Suppose the selfish equilibria exist, i.e., p1 < p2 and p3 < p4. In these equilibria, the authority's expected welfare and the competitor's expected profit are larger than in any other equilibrium. This applies to the selfish equilibria in pure strategies of the four- and two-message games as well as the selfish equilibria in mixed strategies of the four-message game.

By Proposition 1, whenever they exist, the selfish equilibria can be considered to be the natural solution of the signaling games, as they are strictly `preferred' by both the competitor and the authority. Whenever a selfish equilibrium does not exist, we have shown that any equilibrium implements the default decision. Therefore, in these cases, the authority need not listen to the content of the competitor's communication and optimally and straightforwardly implements the default decision, based on its own information. Let us now look in detail at the implications of the selfish equilibria where S communicates its preferred decision and R implements it. By Lemmas 3 and 8, the formal condition for this equilibrium is

p1 < p2, p3 < p4.

(11)

This constellation of prior information is compatible with dP or dC being the default decision. It means that if the competitor, through its communication, reveals that the merger type is profit-increasing (type 1 or 2), then the authority, based on its own information, must expect that the competitor's preferred (clearing) decision is more likely to be welfare-increasing than decreasing. Simultaneously, it must hold that blocking the merger is optimal by the authority's prior information should the competitor reveal that the merger type is profit-decreasing (3 or 4). Why is the selfish equilibrium welfare-superior to the default decision (Proposition 1)? Clearly, it reveals valuable information to the authority: The competitor, through the selfish recommendation, truthfully reveals whether
23

the actual merger type is profit-increasing (1 or 2) or profit-decreasing (3 or 4), thereby truthfully excluding the two remaining types. Combining this truthful information with the authority's own prior information should intuitively improve the quality of the authority's decision. The price the authority pays for this information is to implement the competitor's preferred decision. Nevertheless, the existence condition of the selfish equilibrium, (11), ensures that the authority follows the competitor's recommendation only if that increases expected welfare as compared to ignoring the competitor. Intuitively, in any equilibrium, the authority plays a best response based on all available information, and it always has the option to implement the default. Therefore, a decision different from the default will only be taken if it is superior. As mentioned above, the competitor intentionally sends a crude signal by only revealing a pair of merger types rather than the actual merger type. For instance, if the competitor reveals that the merger type is profit-increasing (types 1 or 2), the authority will clear the merger if it thinks, by (11), that welfare is more likely to increase than decrease given this information. If the actual merger type is 2, then the authority's decision will be ex post welfare-maximizing, whereas, if it is type 1, the decision will be wrong. In expectation, however, clearance is the right decision. If, instead, the competitor revealed the actual type, then nothing would change if the merger were 2, but in case of type 1, the authority would block the merger, hurting the competitor. Given this, it is better for the competitor to conceal the actual type.
Policy Recommendation. Based on its own information about the likely merger implications, the authority should check if condition (11) holds or not. In plain words, this condition is: Conditional on the merger being profit-increasing for the competitor, welfare must be expected to increase after clearance, and, conditional on the merger being profit-decreasing, welfare must be expected to decrease after clearance. If this condition holds, the authority should ask the competitor directly whether the merger will increase or decrease the competitor's profit, while asking for welfare implications is not sensible by our analysis. Then the authority should implement the competitor's preferred decision. It can take for granted that the information is truthful as lying is not in the competitor's interest. Equivalently, one might ask for a recommendation to either clear or block the merger, but should understand that the response will follow the competitor's selfish interest. If (11) does not hold, implement the default decision, i.e., the optimal decision
24

under ignorance of the competitor's communication. Derived from this recommendation, we emphasize that the quality of the authority's own information-gathering effort is crucial. This prior information decides whether hearing or listening is the optimal policy, and it is the basis for the default decision.
8. Conclusion
Our paper is the first to set up a formal game-theoretical model for the strategic interactions between competitor and authority in merger proceedings. This effort follows the spirit of information economics, which understands information asymmetries as a major driving force of economic decision making and should therefore be in the focus of policy making.35 The goal of this paper was to outline the extent of usefulness and abuse of hearing competitors in order to derive a recommendation as to how to distinguish between cases where competitors should only be heard, and those where they should be listened to. We have analyzed two cheap talk signaling games which differ by the richness of the signaling language. In equilibrium, the competitor will always use a `crude' language, strategically concealing information. Our main result is that the authority should generally ignore the competitor's recommendation, with one exception: If the interests of both parties are statistically aligned in a certain way, the authority should straightforwardly implement the competitor's recommendation. This is a price worth paying as it removes uncertainty and thus enables a decision that is better in expectation. The decision of whether to hear or to listen is based entirely on the authority's own information. Even if it is optimal to ignore the competitor's communication, the authority's decision is based on its own information. Because of this, the competition authorities should focus on the quality of their own information gathering effort.36 In our analysis we made simplifying assumptions regarding merger types and the information structure in order to obtain a tractable model. In particular, competitors in practice are likely to be uncertain about the merger implications. Of course, we can always interpret payoffs in our games as
35See, e.g., Stiglitz (2002). 36See, e.g., Duso et al. (2010) for a discussion of the event study methodology, and the recent Miller (2014) on simulations of merger effects.
25

(discounted) expected values. Apart from that, we think that as long as there is relevant information on the side of the competitor that is not available to the authorities, and is not verifiable, the basic logic of our results applies: There are situations in which it is in both sides' interest to communicate some of that information and act on it, understanding that this information will not be complete and it will necessarily have to be profitable for both sides.

Appendix A. Formal Results

Appendix A.1. Pure-strategy equilibria of the four-message signaling game
We formally derive all pure-strategy equilibria of the four-message signaling game. As part of these proofs, we will show that R is never indifferent between decisions on the equilibrium path given that S plays a pure strategy. This is used in the proof of Lemma 6. We denote the set of equilibrium messages by M~ . Thus, an off-equilibrium message my is denoted by my / M~ . Arbitrary (and different) types are denoted by ti, tj, tk, tl  T , and arbitrary (and different) messages by mw, mx, my, mz  M .

Lemma 1. The game has "uninformative" pure-strategy equilibria in which S always sends the same message mx  M, while R implements the default decision. Formally, for all ti  T and all my / M~ , these equilibria are
1. (implementing ddefault = dC)

m(ti) = mx, d(mx) = d(my) = ddefault = dC , µix = pi, µy2 + µy3  µ1y + µy4.

(A.1)

existence condition: p2 + p3 > p1 + p4.

2. (implementing ddefault = dP )

m(ti) = mx, d(mx) = d(my) = ddefault = dP , µxi = pi, µ2y + µ3y  µy1 + µ4y.

(A.2)

existence condition: p2 + p3 < p1 + p4.

Proof of Lemma 1. Clearly, as S always sends the same message mx (for every type), R's updated beliefs on the equilibrium path are equal to the prior beliefs. This implies that the default decision is implemented. The
26

default decision is based on expected welfare only. Thus, it might be dP or dC. Depending on the type, S's preferred choice might coincide with the default or not. If not, then S would have an incentive to deviate if there is an off-equilibrium message my / M~ for which R does not implement the default decision. Therefore, R's off-equilibrium beliefs must be such that R implements the default whenever an off-equilibrium message my is observed. More precisely:
1. For types ti  {t1, t2}, S prefers dC. If ddefault = dC, there is no incentive to deviate. If, however, ddefault = dP , then S has an incentive to deviate to an off-equilibrium message my if that leads to dC. Therefore, if p2 + p3 < p1 + p4 (when ddefault = dP ), then the supporting beliefs must satisfy

µiyWi  0  µy2 + µy3  µy1 + µy4.
tiT

(A.3)

It can be seen that this corresponds to the relation of priors that implements ddefault = dP . 2. For types ti  {t3, t4}, S prefers dP . If ddefault = dP , there is no incentive to deviate. If, however, ddefault = dC, then S has an incen-
tive to deviate to an off-equilibrium message my if that leads to dP .
By symmetry, we obtain results similar to the above, with reversed

inequalities.

Note that, by Assumption 1, R is never indifferent between decisions, as the equilibrium (default) decision is exclusively based on expected welfare and prior probabilities.

Lemma 2. The game has pure-strategy equilibria in which S plays two messages in equilibrium, M~ = {mx, my}, such that one type is revealed through message my, i.e., Ty = {tl}, while the other message mx is sent for the remaining types, ts  Tx = {ti, tj, tk}. In these equilibria, R ignores S's message and implements the default decision. These equilibria are (denoting off-equilibrium messages by mz / M~ )
1. (implementing ddefault = dP )

m(ts) = mx, m(tl) = my, tl  {t1, t4},

d(mx) = d(my) = d(mz) = ddefault = dP ,

µsx =

ps , ptrTx r

µlx = 0,

µsy = 0,

µly = 1,

µ2z + µ3z  µ1z + µ4z,

27

(A.4)

existence condition: tsTx psWs  0, Wl < 0. 2. (implementing ddefault = dC)

m(ts) = mx, m(tl) = my, tl  {t2, t3},

d(mx) = d(my) = d(mz) = ddefault = dC ,

µsx =

ps , ptrTx r

µxl = 0,

µys = 0,

µyl

= 1,

µ2z + µ3z  µz1 + µ4z,

(A.5)

existence condition: tsTx psWs  0, Wl > 0.

Proof of Lemma 2. Consider S's candidate strategy which is represented by Tx = {ti, tj, tk} and Ty = {tl}. Two messages are therefore played on the equilibrium path. As message my is sent for type tl only, we have µly = 1 and µxl = 0, and R's best response is



d (my )

=

dP dC

if Wl < 0, i.e., tl  {t1, t4}, if Wl > 0, i.e., tl  {t2, t3}, .

(A.6)

Message mx is sent for all other types, which gives the updated beliefs
stated in (A.4) and (A.5). R's best response is found as follows. Decision dP implies U R = 0 whereas dC has an expected payoff of

µxs U R(ts, dC ) =

ts Tx

ts Tx

ps
tr Tx

pr

Ws.

(A.7)

Therefore, dC is optimal if

tsTx

ps
tr Tx

pr Ws



0



psWs  0.
ts Tx

(A.8)

It follows that



d(mx)

=

dP dC

if if

tsTx psWs  0, tsTx psWs  0.

Combining (A.6) and (A.9), we distinguish four cases:

(A.9)

1. tsTx psWs  0 and Wl < 0: These conditions imply tiT piWi < 0, i.e., ddefault = dP . Here, the optimal decision after each message is d(my) = d(mx) = dP =
ddefault. Deviating to the other message (mx, resp. my) does not 28

affect the decision and is thus never profitable. We need supporting beliefs such that after observing an off-equilibrium message mz, R implements the same decision, i.e., we need µ2z + µz3  µz1 + µz4 which implies d(mz) = dP . 2. tsTx psWs  0 and Wl > 0: Here, d(my) = dC and d(mx) = dP . S sends mx for three types and has a payoff of 0 in these cases. There is no equilibrium here, because for one of those three types, S's payoff can be improved from 0 to 1 by reporting my instead, which leads to decision dC. 3. tsTx psWs  0 and Wl < 0: Here, d(my) = dP and d(mx) = dC. S sends mx for three types and must have a negative payoff for at least one of those types. There is no equilibrium here, because S can avoid a negative payoff by reporting my instead, which leads to decision dP with a payoff of 0. 4. tsTx psWs  0 and Wl > 0: These conditions imply tiT p(ti)Wi  0, i.e., ddefault = dC. Here, d(my) = d(mx) = dC = ddefault. Deviating to the other message (mx, resp. my) does not affect the decision and is thus not profitable. We need supporting beliefs such that after observing an off-equilibrium message mz, R implements the same decision. Thus, we need µ2z+µ3z  µ1z + µz4 which implies d(mz) = dC.
Note that in the above four cases, tsTx psWs  0 (resp.  0) can never hold with equality, by Assumption 1. Therefore, R is never indifferent between decisions after message mx (and, obviously, neither after message my ).

Lemma 3. The game has pure-strategy equilibria in which pairs of types are associated with the same message, Tx = {ti, tj} and Ty = {tk, tl}, while R either implements the default decision or S's preferred decision. Denoting ts  Tx, tu  Ty and mz / M~ , the set of these equilibria can be partitioned as follows.

1. (implementing ddefault = dP )

m(ts) = mx, m(tu) = my,

d(mx) = d(my) = d(mz) = ddefault = dP ,

µxs

=

pi

ps +

pj

,

µys

= 0,

µuy

=

pk

pu +

pl

,

µux = 0,

µ2z + µ3z < µz1 + µz4. 29

(A.10)

existence condition: tsTx psWs  0, tuTy puWu  0 . 2. (implementing ddefault = dC)

m(ts) = mx, m(tu) = my,

d(mx) = d(my) = d(mz) = ddefault = dC ,

µxs

=

pi

ps +

pj

,

µys

= 0,

µuy

=

pk

pu +

pl

,

µxu = 0,

µ2z + µz3  µz1 + µz4.

(A.11)

existence condition: tsTx psWs  0, tuTy puWu  0 . 3. (implementing S's preferred decision)

Tx = {t1, t2}, Ty = {t3, t4},

m(ts) = mx, m(tu) = my,

d(mx) = dC, d(my) = dP , d(mz)  {dP , dC},

µxs

=

p1

ps +

p2

,

µsy

= 0,

µyu =

p3

pu +

p4

,

µxu = 0,

µzi  0.

(A.12)

existence condition: p3 < p4, p1 < p2.

Proof of Lemma 3. We consider all candidates where Tx = {ti, tj} and Ty = {tk, tl}, i.e. the messages mx and my are played on the equilibrium path, each message for exactly two types. The corresponding updated be-
liefs conditional on message mx, resp. my, therefore have the form stated in Lemma 3. Consider R's decision conditional on observing message mx. Decision dP implies UR = 0, whereas dC has an expected payoff of

µsxU R(ts, dC ) =

ts Tx

ts Tx

ps
tr Tx

pr

Ws.

(A.13)

Therefore, dC is optimal if

ts Tx

ps
tr Tx

pr Ws



0



psWs  0.
tsTx

(A.14)

Summarizing, the optimal decision is



d(mx)

=

dP dC

if tsTx psWs  0,

if 30

tsTx psWs  0.

(A.15)

By symmetry, the optimal decision conditional on observing message my =

mx is



d(my)

=

dP dC

if if

tuTy puWu  0, tuTy puWu  0.

(A.16)

Combining (A.15) and (A.16), we distinguish four cases:

1. tsTx psWs  0 and tuTy puWu  0: This constellation implies tiT p(ti)Wi  0 and, therefore, ddefault = dP . Here, d(my) = d(mx) = dP = ddefault. S has no incentive to deviate between messages mx and my as both imply the same decision.
We need supporting beliefs such that after off-equilibrium messages mz, R implements dP as well: µz2 + µz3  µz1 + µ4z.
2. tsTx psWs  0 and tuTy puWu  0: This implies tiT piWi  0 and, therefore, ddefault = dC. Here, d(my) = d(mx) = dC = ddefault. S has no incentive to deviate between messages mx and my as both imply the same decision. We
need supporting beliefs such that after off-equilibrium messages mz, R implements dC as well: µz2 + µ3z  µ1z + µ4z.
3. tsTx psWs  0 and tuTy puWu  0: Here, d(mx) = dP and d(my) = dC. Therefore, S is able to `choose' R's decision in its favor by sending the appropriate message. This
implies that there is no equilibrium here unless R's decisions co-
incide with S's preferred decisions for every type. This is equiva-
lent to requiring that Tx = {t3, t4} (i.e. blocking of types 3 and 4) and Ty = {t1, t2} (i.e. clearing of types 1 and 2). Given that Tx = {t3, t4} and Ty = {t1, t2}, the condition ( tsTx psWs  0 and
tuTy puWu  0) simplifies to

p3W3 + p4W4  0 and p1W1 + p2W2  0  p3 < p4 and p1 < p2.

(A.17)

4. tsTx psWs  0 and tuTy puWu  0: As mx and my are arbitrary (but different and feasible) messages, the analysis of this case is already covered by case 3. above.
Note that the expected-welfare conditions in (A.15) and (A.16) cannot hold with equality, by Assumption 1. Therefore, R is never indifferent between decisions.

31

Lemma 4. The game does not have a pure-strategy equilibrium where exactly three different messages are used on the equilibrium path.
Proof of Lemma 4. Suppose that exactly three different messages are played in equilibrium, Tx = {ti, tj}, Ty = {tk}, Tz = {tl}. This implies that S sends a unique message for two of the four types (tk and tl) respectively, so these two types are identified. For these two types, R optimally responds by implementing the first-best decision. We distinguish two cases.
a) Suppose for the two identified types, i.e., after messages my and mz, R's first-best decision is the same. Therefore, one of the two types involves a conflict of interest, and, moreover, R optimally implements the opposite decision after message mx. Therefore, S has an incentive to deviate from either my or mz and can improve profit by sending mx instead.
b) Suppose for the two identified types the first-best decision is different. In this case, S can `control' R's decision by sending the appropriate message, either my or mz. Therefore, in an equilibrium the two identified types must be t2 and t4 which do not involve a conflict of interest. However, for the two remaining types t1 and t3 and message mx, R's decision must be the same, but S prefers different decisions for each of them, and can get the preferred decision by deviating to either my or mz.
Note that in each situation above, R's best response is entirely based on prior probabilities and the corresponding expected welfare, so R is never indifferent between decisions, by Assumption 1.
Lemma 5. The game does not have a pure-strategy equilibrium where four different messages are used on the equilibrium path.
Proof of Lemma 5. Suppose S sends a different message for each type, thereby fully revealing all types. Then R's best response is to implement the first-best decision for each type (dc for t2 and t3, dp for t1 and t4). However, for types t1 and t3, there is a conflict of interest. Therefore, S has an incentive to deviate to a message that implements Ss preferred decision. This profitable deviation is always feasible. Note that after each message in this candidate, R's best response is unique.
32

Appendix A.2. Proof of Proposition 1 Proof of Proposition 1. The existence condition for the selfish pure- and mixed-strategy equilibria of the four-message game (Lemmas 2 and 8) and, by the discussion in subsection 6, the selfish pure-strategy equilibria of the two-message game, was shown to be

p3 < p4, p1 < p2.

(A.18)

By Lemmas 1 to 9, and the discussion in subsection 6, all pure- and mixedstrategy equilibria of the four- and two-message games implement either S's preferred (selfish) decision or the default decision. Therefore, it suffices to show that the selfish equilibria are payoff-superior for both players to the corresponding default decision.

Given the above existence condition for the selfish equilibrium and the fact
that there always exists an equilibrium that implements the default decision
(see, e.g., the uninformative equilibrium described in Lemma 1), the two can
only be compared in case both exist simultaneously, i.e., whenever (A.18)
holds. We assume this in the following. We start with considering the authority's payoff, UR. First, suppose dP is the default decision (and (A.18) holds). Then taking the default implies UR = 0. The selfish equilibrium implements dP as well if the merger type is either type 3 or type 4, with UR = 0. If, however, the merger is of type 1, we get UR = -1 and for type 2 we get UR = 1 where, by (A.18),
the latter is more likely. In expectation the selfish equilibrium implements E[U R] = p1W1 + p2W2 = -p1 + p2 > 0 (the latter by (A.18)) which is better than the default UR = 0.

Second, suppose dC is the default decision (and (A.18) holds). Taking the default implies E[U R] = tiT piWi = -p1 + p2 + p3 - p4 > 0 (the latter by (A.18)). The selfish equilibrium implements dP for types 3 and 4, with UR = 0, and it implements dC for types 1 (with UR = -1) and 2 (with UR = 1), where, again, welfare is conditionally more likely to be positive.
In expectation, the selfish equilibrium implements E[U R] = p1W1 + p2W2 =
-p1 + p2 > -p1 + p2 + p3 - p4, because p3 < p4 by (A.18).

Combining these results, we conclude that the selfish equilibrium implements strictly higher expected welfare (UR) than the default, regardless of
what the default decision is.

33

Finally, consider the competitor's payoff, US. As the selfish equilibrium al-
ways implements S's preferred decision, whereas the default decision max-
imizes expected welfare, the selfish equilibrium is intuitively superior. We
show this formally in the following. Suppose dP is the default decision. Then US = 0 ex post, whereas the selfish equilibrium has US = 1 for types 1 and 2 and US = 0 for types 3 and 4. In expectation, the selfish equilibrium gives E[US] = p1 + p2 > 0,
which is strictly better. Now suppose dC is the default decision. Then E[U S] = p1 + p2 - p3 - p4, whereas the selfish equilibrium, again, has US = 1 for types 1 and 2 and US = 0 for types 3 and 4. In expectation, the selfish equilibrium gives E[US] = p1 + p2 > 0, which obviously strictly better than p1 + p2 - p3 - p4.

Appendix A.3. Mixed-strategy equilibria of the four-message signaling game

In the proofs below we use mw, mx, my, mz  M (resp. ti, tj, tk, tl  T ) to denote arbitrary and different messages (resp. merger types). Moreover, M~

denotes the set of messages that are played on the equilibrium path. Thus, m / M~ denotes off-equilibrium messages. In order to simplify the formal

statements of equilibria, we make the following omissions in the lemmas

below. We omit m / M~ , i.e., we

the statements of pmi = 0 for state S's mixing probabilities

off-equilibrium messages only for the equilibrium

messages. Furthermore, we simplify the statement of R's off-equilibrium

decisions and off-equilibrium beliefs in equilibria where these beliefs are

unrestricted because there is no potential deviation incentive for S. In

these cases we write pCw  [0, 1] and µwi  [0, 1] without stating the precise relationship between beliefs and corresponding decisions:

µwi  [0, 1],

µwi = 1, ti  T, mw / M~ ,

tiT



pwC

=

1 0

if if

tiT µiwWi  0 tiT µwi Wi  0,

mw / M~ .

(A.19) (A.20)

Lemma 6. The game does not have mixed-strategy equilibria in which S plays a pure strategy.

Proof of Lemma 6. By Assumption 1 and as analyzed in the proofs of Lemmas 1 to 5, R has a unique and pure-strategy best response to any pure strategy of S.

34

Lemma 7. The game has mixed-strategy equilibria in which R plays a pure strategy. In these equilibria, R implements the default decision (d = ddefault) regardless of the message(s). S plays a mixed strategy and plays either two, three or four messages on the equilibrium path (|M~ |  {2, 3, 4}). The equilibria can be partitioned into
1. (implementing ddefault = dC)

pk2p2 + pk3p3  pk1p1 + pk4p4, mk  M~ ,

µki =

pki pi tsT pks

ps

,

ti

 T, mk

 M~ ,

µr2 + µr3  µ1r + µr4 mr / M~ .

pxC = 1, mx  M, (A.21)

existence condition: ddefault = dC. 2. (implementing ddefault = dP )

p2kp2 + pk3p3  p1kp1 + p4kp4, mk  M~ ,

µik =

pikpi tsT psk

ps

,

ti

 T, mk

 M~ ,

µr2 + µr3  µ1r + µr4 mr / M~ .

pxC = 0, mx  M, (A.22)

existence condition: ddefault = dP .

Proof of Lemma 7. Given that R always implements the same decision, S is always indifferent between messages, and therefore willing to play mixed. This requires, of course, that R implements that decision also off the equilibrium path. For an equilibrium, we need that R's decision is a best response to S's strategy. After each message mk  M~ (i.e., on the equilibrium path), R's best response is dC if

µki Wi  0 

ti T

ti T

pki pi tsT pks ps

Wi



0



pki piWi  0
ti T

 p2kp2 + p3kp3  pk1p1 + pk4p4.

(A.23)

For all off-equilibrium messages mr / M~ (if there are any), we need beliefs that lead to the same optimal decision,

µ2r + µr3  µ1r + µ4r, mr / M~ .

(A.24)

35

If the reverse inequalities hold in the above, then dP is the best response on
and off the equilibrium path.
Finally, note that if we add up the conditions (A.23) over all messages, making use of the identity mM~ pim  1, then we get p2 + p3 > p1 + p4, i.e., the condition that makes dC the default decision. Thus, the above described equilibrium implies the default decision (again, with ddefault = dP for the
reverse inequalities.

Lemma 8. The game has mixed-strategy equilibria in which R plays a pure strategy including both decisions on the equilibrium path. In these equilibria, R implements S's preferred decision, and they exist only if p2 > p1 and p3 < p4. They can be partitioned by the number of messages |M~ | played by S on the equilibrium path:
1. (S plays messages M~ = {mx, my, mz} in equilibrium)
1.1 (Implementing dC after mx and my, and dP after mz.) For mk  {mx, my}, ti  {t1, t2}, tj  {t3, t4}:

pk2p2  p1kp1, p3k = pk4 = 0, pCk = 1,

pz1 = p2z = 0, p3z = p4z = 1, pzC = 0,

µki =

pk1

pik pi p1 + p2k

p2

,

µjk = 0,

µiz = 0,

µjz =

p3

pj +

p4

,

pwC  [0, 1], µlw  [0, 1], tl  T, mw / M~ .

(A.25)

1.2 (Implementing dP after mx and my, and dC after mz.) For mk  {mx, my}, ti  {t3, t4}, tj  {t1, t2}:

pk3p3  pk4p4, pk1 = pk2 = 0, pCk = 0,

p3z = pz4 = 0, pz1 = pz2 = 1, pCz = 1,

µik =

p3k

pki pi p3 + pk4

p4

,

µjk = 0,

µzi = 0,

µzj =

p1

pj +

p2

,

pCw  [0, 1], µwl  [0, 1], tl  T, mw / M~ .

(A.26)

2. (S plays all four messages in equilibrium, R plays S' preferred decision after two messages respectively.)

36

For mk  {mx, my}, ml  {mw, mz}, ti  {t1, t2}, tj  {t3, t4}:

pk2p2  pk1p1, p3k = pk4 = 0, pkC = 1,

p3l p3  p4l p4, p1l = pl2 = 0, plC = 0,

µki =

p1k

pki pi p1 + pk2

p2

,

µkj = 0,

µli = 0,

µjl

=

pl3

pjl pj p3 + p4l p4

.

(A.27)

3. (S plays all four messages in equilibrium, R plays one of the decisions after three messages, the other decision after the remaining message.)
3.1 (Implementing dC after mx, my, mz and dP after mw.) For mk  {mx, my, mz}, ti  {t1, t2}, tj  {t3, t4}:

pk2p2  pk1p1, pk3 = pk4 = 0, pkC = 1,

p1w = p2w = 0, pw3 = pw4 = 1, pwC = 0,

µki

=

pik pi p1kp1 + pk2

p2

,

µkj

= 0,

µwi

= 0,

µjw

=

p3

pj +

p4

.

(A.28)

3.2 (Implementing dP after mx, my, mz and dC after mw.) For mk  {mx, my, mz}, ti  {t3, t4}, tj  {t1, t2}:

pk3p3  p4kp4, pk1 = p2k = 0, pCk = 0,

p3w = p3w = 0, p1w = p2w = 1, pwC = 1,

µki

=

pki pi p3kp3 + pk4

p4

,

µkj

= 0,

µwi

= 0,

µwj

=

p1

pj +

p2

.

(A.29)

Proof of Lemma 8. We cover all equilibrium candidates where S mixes, while R plays a pure strategy but does not always play the same decision.37
These candidates are
(a) |M~ | = 2, R plays dC after message mx and dP after message my, (b.1) |M~ | = 3, R plays dC after mx, my and dP after mz, (b.2) |M~ | = 3, R plays dP after mx, my and dC after mz,
(c) |M~ | = 4, R plays dC after mx, my and dP after mw, mz, (d.1) |M~ | = 4, R plays dC after mx, my, mz and dP after mw, (d.2) |M~ | = 4, R plays dP after mx, my, mz and dC after mw.

37The candidates where R always plays the same decision are covered in Lemma 7.
37

In the following, we analyze these candidates. (a) |M~ | = 2, R plays dC after message mx and dP after message my = mx. The unique best response of S is obviously mx for t1 and t2 and my for t3 and t4. This is a pure stragegy. Therefore, there are no (mixed) equilibria for a).
(b.1) |M~ | = 3, R plays dC after mx, my and dP after mz, Consider S's best response. Message mz is the unique (and pure) best response for t3 and t4. Optimality of dP requires the existence condition p3 < p4. For t1 and t2, S is indifferent between messages mx and my (but would never play mz) and therefore is prepared to mix. However, in order to correspond to R's strategies, S mixed strategies must make dC the optimal decision, i.e.,

µ1kW1 + µk2W2  0



pk1

p1k p1 p1 + pk2

p2

W1

+

pk2 p2 p1kp1 + pk2

p2

W2



0

(A.30)

 p2kp2  pk1p1, mk  {mx, my}

Adding the two conditions in (A.30), using pxi + pyi  1 for i  {1, 2}, we get the existence condition p2  p1 which, by Assumption 1 im-

plies p2 > p1. In this equilibrium, S's preferred decision is always

implemented. Therefore, S cannot have an incentive to deviate to the

off-equilibrium message, implying unrestricted off-equilibrium beliefs. (b.2) |M~ | = 3, R plays dP after mx, my and dC after mz. The proof is
omitted because, by symmetry, it is similar to the analysis of (b.1).

The types who send mz resp. mx and my are interchanged and we

have reversed inequalities for the optimality of dP after mx and my.

The existence conditions are the same. (c) |M~ | = 4, R plays dC after mx, my and dP after mw, mz. Consider S's

best response. Messages mx and my (resp. mw and mz) will only be

sent for t1 and t2 (resp. t3 and t4). However, S is indifferent between mx and my (resp. mw and mz), so is prepared to mix in any way.

For an equilibrium, we therefore only require that the above stated

decisions are optimal given S's mixed strategies. Therefore, we need

(derived similar to (A.30))

p2kp2  pk1p1, p3l p3  pl4p4, mk  {mx, my}, ml  {mw, mz}. (A.31)

Adding up the two conditions for each message pair (using p2x + p2y  1 etc.), we get the existence conditions p2 > p1 and p3 < p4 (strict
inequalities by Assumption 1). 38

(d.1) |M~ | = 4, R plays dC after mx, my, mz and dP after mw. Consider S's best response. Message mw is the unique (and pure) best response for t3 and t4. Then optimality of dP requires the existence condition p4 > p3. As for types t1 and t2, S is indifferent between the remaining three messages but would never send mw. Therefore S is willing to mix these messages in any way. However, we need dC to be optimal, which is equivalent to (derived similar to (A.30))

p2kp2  pk1p1, mk  {mx, my, mz}.

(A.32)

Adding up these three conditions (using p2x + py2 + p2z  1 etc.), we get the existence condition p2 > p1 (strict inequality by Assumption 1). (d.2) |M~ | = 4, R plays dP after mx, my, mz and dC after mw. The proof is
omitted because of similarity to that of (d.1), by symmetry.

Lemma 9. The game does not have equilibria where both S and R play mixed strategies.

Proof of Lemma 9. Before classifying equilibrium candidates, we establish the result that R will never mix between decisions after all messages, i.e., R will play pure after at least one of the messages on the equilibrium path. Mixing after all messages requires indifference for each message mw  M~ on the equilibrium path, i.e.

µiwWi = 0 

ti T

tiT

piw
tsT

pi pws

ps

Wi

=

0

 pwi piWi = 0  pw2 p2 + pw3 p3 = p1wp1 + p4wp4.

ti T

(A.33)

Now add up these equalities over all messages, making use of the identity mwM~ pwi  1 for all ti  T . This results in p2 + p3 = p1 + p4 which is ruled
out by Assumption 1. Therefore, R cannot be indifferent after all messages,
so we ignore the respective equilibrium candidates in the following. In order
to play a mixed strategy, S must play at least two messages in equilibrium.
The remaining candidates can be partitioned into the following cases (by the set M~ of messages played in equilibrium):

a) M~ = {mx, my}. R mixes after mx and plays pure after my. 39

b) M~ = {mx, my, mz}. R mixes after mx and plays pure after my, mz. c) M~ = {mx, my, mz}. R mixes after mx, my and plays pure after mz. d) M~ = M. R mixes after mw and plays pure after mx, my, mz. e) M~ = M. R mixes after mw, mx and plays pure after my, mz. f) M~ = M. R mixes after mw, mx, my and plays pure after mz.

In the following, we analyze these cases one by one.

a) M~ = {mx, my}. R mixes after mx and plays pure after my. Suppose R plays dC after my (pure). Then for t1 and t2, S's unique best response is to send my. Similarly, for t3 and t4, S's unique best response is to send mx, regardless of R's mixing probabilities. But this is a pure strategy, contradicting the assumption of a mixed strategy of S. By symmetry, a similar argument applies if R plays dP after my.
b) M~ = {mx, my, mz}. R mixes after mx and plays pure after my, mz.

b.1) Suppose R plays decision dC after my and mz. Then for types t3 and t4 the unique best response is to send mx in order to get dP at least sometimes, while S will never play mx for t1 and t2 Given this, mixing over decisions after mx is optimal only if R is indifferent,

µ3xW3 + µ4xW4 = 0



p3

p3 +

p4 W3

+

p3

p4 +

p4 W4

=

0



p3 = p4,

(A.34)

which is ruled out by Assumption 1.
b.2) Suppose R plays decision dP after my and mz. By symmetry, the conclusion is similar to that for b.1).
b.3) Suppose R plays decision dC after my and dP after mz. Then S's unique best response is for each type to always send either my or mz. This implements S's preferred decision, so S will never play mx (after which R plays mixed), contradicting the candiate.
c) M~ = {mx, my, mz}. R mixes after mx, my and plays pure after mz. Suppose R plays dC after mz. Then for types t1 and t2, S's unique best response is to send mz (pure play). Message mz will never be sent for 40

t3 and t4 because S's preferred decision dP is only played after mx and my (as part of the mixing). As mx and my are only sent for t3 and t4 (according to some px3, py3, px4, py4, possibly including pure components), R's indifference condition (to make mixing optimal) is again p3 = p4 (derived similarly to (A.34)), which is ruled out by Assumption 1. Therefore, R will not mix for both my and mx, contradicting the candidate. By symmetry, the same conclusion obtains if we assume that R plays dP after mz.
d) M~ = M. R mixes after mw and plays pure after mx, my, mz.
d.1) Suppose R always plays the same decision, say dC, after mx, my, mz. Then S will send these messages exclusively for t1 and t2, while mw is sent exclusively for t3 and t4. But then, similar to the derivation of (A.34), R must be indifferent between decisions, knowing that the type is either t3 or t4. Indifference requires p3 = p4 which is ruled out by Assumption 1. By symmetry, we get the same conclusion if we assume that dP is played after mx, my, mz.
d.2) Suppose R plays different `pure' decisions, i.e., dC after one or two of mx, my, mz, and dP after the remaining message(s). Then S's best response is obviously a pure strategy, avoiding R's mixed play and therefore contradicting the candidate.
e) M~ = M. R mixes after mw, mx and plays pure after my, mz.
e.1) Suppose R always plays the same decision, say dC, after my and mz. Then S will send these messages exclusively for t1 and t2 (in some possibly mixed way), while mw, mx are sent exclusively for t3 and t4. But then, similar to the derivation of (A.34), R must be indifferent between decisions after both mw and mx, knowing that the type is either t3 or t4. Indifference requires p3 = p4 which is ruled out by Assumption 1. By symmetry, we get the same conclusion if we assume that dP is played after mx and my.
e.2) Suppose R plays different decisions after my and mz. Then S's best response is obviously a pure strategy, avoiding R's mixed play and therefore contradicting the candidate.
f) M~ = M. R mixes after mw, mx, my and plays pure after mz. Suppose R plays dC after mz. Then for types t1 and t2, S's unique best response 41

is to send mz (pure play). Message mz will never be sent for t3 and t4 because S's preferred decision dP is only played after mw, mx and my (as part of the mixing). As mw, mx and my are only sent for t3 and t4 (according to some pure/mixed play), R's indifference condition (to make mixing optimal) is again p3 = p4 (derived similarly to (A.34)), which is ruled out by Assumption 1. Therefore, R will not mix for all three messages, contradicting the candidate. By symmetry, the same conclusion obtains if we assume that R plays dP after mz.
42

Appendix B. Data

Table B.1: Cases with Competitor participation in Phase 2 EU

Type of Decision
Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(3) Art. 8(2) Art. 8(2) Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) Art. 8(2) Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(3) Art. 8(2) Art. 8(2) Art. 8(2) Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(3) Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(3) Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(3), Art. 8(4) Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(3) Art. 8(2) Art. 8(2) Art. 8(3), Art. 8(4) Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(3) Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations
43

Case no.
M.42 M.43 M.126 M.12 M.53 M.68 M.222 M.214 M.190 M.291 M.358 M.315 M.308 M.468 M.469 M.269 M.477 M.484 M.430 M.582 M.623 M.553 M.580 M.490 M.603 M.619 M.856 M.784 M.754 M.737 M.774 M.794 M.970 M.890 M.1069 M.1016 M.950 M.938 M.993 M.986

Year Notification
1990 1990 1991 1991 1991 1991 1992 1992 1992 1992 1993 1993 1993 1994 1994 1994 1994 1994 1994 1995 1995 1995 1995 1995 1995 1995 1996 1996 1996 1996 1996 1996 1997 1997 1997 1997 1997 1997 1997 1997

Rivals Heard
0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 0

Table B.1 (continued)

Type of Decision
Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(3) Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(3) Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(3) Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(3) Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) Art. 8(2) Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(3) Art. 8(2) Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(4) Art. 8(2) Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations
44

Case no.
M.942 M.833 M.877 M.913 M.1027 M.1313 M.1221 M.1225 M.1157 M.1673 M.1636 M.1663 M.1601 M.1693 M.1630 M.1383 M.1641 M.1524 M.1532 M.1628 M.1671 M.1578 M.1439 M.1672 M.1915 M.1845 M.1741 M.1813 M.1940 M.1853 M.2060 M.2499 M.2033 M.1879 M.2498 M.1806 M.2097 M.1882 M.2139 M.2416 M.2333 M.2533 M.2434

Year Notification
1997 1997 1997 1997 1997 1998 1998 1998 1998 1999 1999 1999 1999 1999 1999 1999 1999 1999 1999 1999 1999 1999 1999 1999 2000 2000 2000 2000 2000 2000 2000 2000 2000 2000 2000 2000 2000 2000 2000 2001 2001 2001 2001

Rivals Heard
0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 0

Table B.1 (continued)

Type of Decision
Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) Art. 8(2) Art. 8(3) Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(4) Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(3) Art. 8(2) Art. 8(2) Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) Art. 8(2) Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(3) Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(3) Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations
45

Case no.
M.2530 M.2547 M.2621 M.2495 M.2220 M.2568 M.2283 M.2420 M.2389 M.2187 M.2314 M.2201 M.2947 M.2903 M.2706 M.2876 M.2698 M.2650 M.2861 M.2822 M.3056 M.3216 M.2978 M.3083 M.2972 M.3099 M.3431 M.3436 M.3440 M.3916 M.3868 M.3796 M.3653 M.3687 M.3696 M.4187 M.4000 M.4404 M.4180 M.4439 M.4381 M.4525 M.4504

Year Notification
2001 2001 2001 2001 2001 2001 2001 2001 2001 2001 2001 2001 2002 2002 2002 2002 2002 2002 2002 2002 2003 2003 2003 2003 2003 2003 2004 2004 2004 2005 2005 2005 2005 2005 2005 2006 2006 2006 2006 2006 2006 2007 2007

Rivals Heard
1 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

Table B.1 (continued)

Type of Decision
Art. 8(2) Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(3) Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(3) Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(3) Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(2) with conditions & obligations Art. 8(3)

Case no.
M.3333 M.4726 M.4513 M.5153 M.4980 M.4919 M.5046 M.5335 M.5440 M.5830 M.5658 M.5675 M.6266 M.6203 M.6166 M.6286 M.6497 M.6576 M.6471 M.6690 M.6663 M.6410 M.6458 M.6570

Year Notification
2007 2007 2007 2008 2008 2008 2008 2008 2009 2010 2010 2010 2011 2011 2011 2011 2012 2012 2012 2012 2012 2012 2012 2012

Rivals Heard
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 0

Table B.2: Competitor Participation as a share of Phase 2 cases EU (Figure 1)

Year Notification
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001

Sum Sum Participation Phase 2
02 24 04 03 16 07 16 5 13 44 12 15 12 15 10 16
46

Sum Participation/ Sum Phase 2 0 .5 0 0 .167 0 .167 .385 1 .8 .8 .625

2002 7 8 2003 2 6 2004 3 3 2005 6 6 2006 6 6 2007 5 5 2008 5 5 2009 1 1 2010 3 3 2011 4 4 2012 5 8

.875 .333 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 .625

Table B.3: Competitor objections as a share of Phase 2 cases with competitor involvement EU (Figure 2)

Year Notification
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

Sum Participation
5 4 12 12 10 7 2 3 6 6 5 5 1 3 4 5

Sum Objections
1 1 3 2 1 4 1 3 6 5 5 5 1 3 3 5

Sum Objections/ Sum Participation
.2 .25 .25 .167 .1 .571 .5 1 1 .833 1 1 1 1 .75 1

47

References
Amir, R., Diamantoudi, E., Xue, L., 3 2009. Merger performance under uncertain efficiency gains. International Journal of Industrial Organization 27 (2), 264­273.
Banal-Estañol, A., Macho-Stadler, I., Seldeslachts, J., 2008. Endogenous mergers and endogenous efficiency gains: The efficiency defence revisited. International Journal of Industrial Organization 26 (1), 69­91.
Banerjee, A., Eckard, E. W., 1998. Are mega-mergers anticompetitive? evidence from the first great merger wave. The Rand Journal of Economics, 803­827.
Cleary Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton, 2004. EU merger control: A brief history. Clougherty, J. A., Duso, T., 2009. The impact of horizontal mergers on rivals: gains to
being left outside a merger. Journal of Management Studies 46 (8), 1365­1395. Clougherty, J. A., Duso, T., 11 2011. Using rival effects to identify synergies and improve
merger typologies. Strategic Organization 9 (4), 310­335. Connelly, B. L., Certo, S. T., Ireland, R. D., Reutzel, C. R., 2011. Signaling theory: A
review and assessment. Journal of Management 37 (1), 39­67. Crawford, V., 1998. A survey of experiments on communication via cheap talk. Journal
of Economic theory 78 (2), 286­298. Crawford, V. P., Sobel, J., 1982. Strategic information transmission. Econometrica 50 (6),
1431­1451. Creane, A., Davidson, C., 2004. Multidivisional firms, internal competition, and the
merger paradox. Canadian Journal of Economics/Revue canadienne d'économique 37 (4), 951­977. Cunha, M., Sarmento, P., Vasconcelos, H., 2014. Uncertain efficiency gains and merger policy. Tech. rep., Universidade do Porto, Faculdade de Economia do Porto. Datta, D. K., Pinches, G. E., Narayanan, V., 1992. Factors influencing wealth creation from mergers and acquisitions: A meta-analysis. Strategic management journal 13 (1), 67­84. Davidson, C., Mukherjee, A., 2007. Horizontal mergers with free entry. International Journal of Industrial Organization 25 (1), 157­172. Deneckere, R., Davidson, C., 1985. Incentives to form coalitions with bertrand competition. The RAND Journal of Economics 16 (4), 473­486. Diesenhaus, J. L., 1987. Competitor standing to challenge a merger of rivals: The applicability of strategic behavior analysis. California Law Review, 2057­2115. Durande, S., Williams, K., 2005. The practical impact of the exercise of the right to be heard: A special focus on the effect of oral hearings and the role of the hearing officers. Competition policy newsletter (2), 22­28. Duso, T., Gugler, K., Yurtoglu, B., 2010. Is the event study methodology useful for merger analysis? a comparison of stock market and accounting data. International Review of Law and Economics 30 (2), 186­192. Duso, T., Gugler, K., Yurtoglu, B. B., 10 2011. How effective is European merger control? European Economic Review 55 (7), 980­1006. Farrell, J., Rabin, M., 1996. Cheap talk. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 103­118. Farrell, J., Shapiro, C., 2001. Scale economies and synergies in horizontal merger analysis. Antitrust Law Journal, 685­710. Faulí-Oller, R., Motta, M., 1996. Managerial incentives for takeovers. Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 5 (4), 497­514.
48

Fridolfsson, S.-O., Stennek, J., 2005. Why mergers reduce profits and raise share prices­a theory of preemptive mergers. Journal of the European Economic Association 3 (5), 1083­1104.
Gürtler, O., Kräkel, M., 2009a. Hostile takeover and costly merger control. Public Choice 141 (3-4), 371­389.
Gürtler, O., Kräkel, M., 2009b. On the inefficiency of merger control. Economics Letters 102 (1), 53­55.
Heubeck, S., Smythe, D. J., Zhao, J., 2006. A note on the welfare effects of horizontal mergers in asymmetric linear oligopolies. Annals of Economics and Finance 7 (1), 29.
Huck, S., Konrad, K. A., Müller, W., 2001. Big fish eat small fish: on merger in Stackelberg markets. Economics letters 73 (2), 213­217.
Huck, S., Konrad, K. A., Müller, W., 2004. Profitable horizontal mergers without cost advantages: The role of internal organization, information and market structure. Economica 71 (284), 575­587.
Hundt, R., 2011. Wireless: The common medium of conversation. Media Law & Policy 20, 95­117.
Kräkel, M., Müller, D., 2014. Merger performance and managerial incentives. Krishna, V., Morgan, J., 2008. Cheap talk. The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics
1, 751­756. Lagerlöf, J. N., Heidhues, P., 2005. On the desirability of an efficiency defense in merger
control. International Journal of Industrial Organization 23 (9), 803­827. Lahiri, S., Ono, Y., 1988. Helping minor firms reduces welfare. The Economic Journal
98 (393), 1199­1202. Lommerud, K. E., Straume, O. R., Sorgard, L., 2001. Merger profitability in unionized
oligopoly. Discussion Paper. Matsusaka, J. G., 1993. Takeover motives during the conglomerate merger wave. The
RAND Journal of Economics, 357­379. Mialon, S. H., 2008. Efficient horizontal mergers: The effects of internal capital realloca-
tion and organizational form. International Journal of Industrial Organization 26 (4), 861­877. Milgrom, P., Roberts, J., 1986. Relying on the information of interested parties. The RAND Journal of Economics, 18­32. Miller, N. H., 2014. Modeling the effects of mergers in procurement. International Journal of Industrial Organization 37, 201­208. Miller, N. H., Weinberg, M., 2014. Mergers facilitate tacit collusion: An empirical investigation of the Miller/Coors joint venture. Discussion Paper. Motta, M., 2004. Competition policy: theory and practice. Cambridge University Press. Neven, D., Röller, L.-H., 2002. Discrepancies between markets and regulators: an analysis of the first ten years of EU merger control. In: The Pros and Cons of Merger Control. Konkurrensverket (Swedish Competition Authority). Nocke, V., Whinston, M. D., 2010. Dynamic merger review. Journal of Political Economy 118 (6). Perry, M. K., Porter, R. H., 1985. Oligopoly and the incentive for horizontal merger. The American Economic Review, 219­227. Riley, J. G., 2001. Silver signals: Twenty-five years of screening and signaling. Journal of Economic literature, 432­478.
49

Roll, R., 1986. The hubris hypothesis of corporate takeovers. Journal of Business, 197­ 216.
Salant, S. W., Switzer, S., Reynolds, R. J., 1983. Losses from horizontal merger: the effects of an exogenous change in industry structure on Cournot-Nash equilibrium. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 98 (2), 185­199.
Sørgard, L., 2009. Optimal merger policy: Enforcement vs. deterrence. The Journal of Industrial Economics 57 (3), 438­456.
Spence, M., 1973. Job market signaling. The quarterly journal of Economics, 355­374. Stigler, G. J., 1950. Monopoly and oligopoly by merger. The American Economic Review
40 (2), 23­34. Stiglitz, J. E., 2002. Information and the change in the paradigm in economics. American
Economic Review, 460­501. Stucke, M. E., Grunes, A. P., 4 2012. The AT&T/T-Mobile merger: What might have
been? Journal of European Competition Law & Practice 3 (2), 196­205. Van Arsdall, M. G., Piehl, M. J., 2014. The evolving role of competitors in merger review.
Crowell & Moring LLP, Law360 Client Information. Van Bael & Bellis, 2005. Competition law of the European Community. Kluwer Law
International. Vasconcelos, H., 2010. Efficiency gains and structural remedies in merger control. The
Journal of Industrial Economics 58 (4), 742­766. Vermeulen, F., Barkema, H., 2001. Learning through acquisitions. Academy of Manage-
ment journal 44 (3), 457­476. Werden, G. J., Joskow, A. S., Johnson, R. L., 1991. The effects of mergers on price
and output: Two case studies from the airline industry. Managerial and Decision Economics 12 (5), 341­352. Williamson, O. E., 1968. Economies as an antitrust defense: The welfare tradeoffs. The American Economic Review, 18­36.
50

SFB 649 Discussion Paper Series 2015
For a complete list of Discussion Papers published by the SFB 649, please visit http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de.
001 "Pricing Kernel Modeling" by Denis Belomestny, Shujie Ma and Wolfgang Karl Härdle, January 2015.
002 "Estimating the Value of Urban Green Space: A hedonic Pricing Analysis of the Housing Market in Cologne, Germany" by Jens Kolbe and Henry Wüstemann, January 2015.
003 "Identifying Berlin's land value map using Adaptive Weights Smoothing" by Jens Kolbe, Rainer Schulz, Martin Wersing and Axel Werwatz, January 2015.
004 "Efficiency of Wind Power Production and its Determinants" by Simone Pieralli, Matthias Ritter and Martin Odening, January 2015.
005 "Distillation of News Flow into Analysis of Stock Reactions" by Junni L. Zhang, Wolfgang K. Härdle, Cathy Y. Chen and Elisabeth Bommes, January 2015.
006 "Cognitive Bubbles" by Ciril Bosch-Rosay, Thomas Meissnerz and Antoni Bosch-Domènech, February 2015.
007 "Stochastic Population Analysis: A Functional Data Approach" by Lei Fang and Wolfgang K. Härdle, February 2015.
008 "Nonparametric change-point analysis of volatility" by Markus Bibinger, Moritz Jirak and Mathias Vetter, February 2015.
009 "From Galloping Inflation to Price Stability in Steps: Israel 1985­2013" by Rafi Melnick and till Strohsal, February 2015.
010 "Estimation of NAIRU with Inflation Expectation Data" by Wei Cui, Wolfgang K. Härdle and Weining Wang, February 2015.
011 "Competitors In Merger Control: Shall They Be Merely Heard Or Also Listened To?" by Thomas Giebe and Miyu Lee, February 2015.
SFSBF6B4694, 9S,pSapnadnaduaeureSrtrSatßraeß1e, 1D,-D10-1107187B8eBrleinrlin htthpt:t/p/:/s/fbs6fb4694.w9.iwwiiw.hiu.h-bue-brleinrl.idne.de
ThTishrisesreasrecahrcwhawsassupsuppoprtoerdtebdybtyhethDeeDuetsucthseche ForFsocrhsuchnugnsgesgmeeminesicnhsachftatfht rtohuroguhgthhethSeFSBF6B4694"9Ec"oEnconmoimc RicisRki"s.k".

