BERLIN

SFB 6 4 9 E C O N O M I C R I S K

SFB 649 Discussion Paper 2016-014
Aggregate Employment, Job Polarization And Inequalities:
A Transatlantic Perspective
Julien Albertini* Jean Olivier Hairault*²
Francois Langot*³ Thepthida Sopraseuth*4
* Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany *² Université de Paris I (CES) PSE, France
*³ Université du Maine, France *4 Université de Cergy-Pontoise, France This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic Risk".
http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de ISSN 1860-5664
SFB 649, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin Spandauer Straße 1, D-10178 Berlin

Aggregate Employment, Job Polarization and Inequalities: A Transatlantic Perspective

Julien Albertini
Humboldt University

Jean Olivier Hairault
Université dPeSPEaris I (CES)

François Langot
(GAINUS-nTivEePrPsi,tIéRdAu),MPaSiEne& BdF

Thepthida Sopraseuth¶
Univers(itTéhedmeaC)e&rgIyU-FPontoise

September 2015

Abstract
This paper develops a multi-sectorial search and matching model with endogenous occupational choice in a context of structural change. Our objective is to shed light on the way labor market institutions aect aggregate employment, job polarization and inequalities observed in the US and in European countries. We consider the cases of the US, France and Germany that are representative of alternative institutional settings, having the potential to induce divergent time-paths in the evolution of labor market outcomes during the process of technological transition. In the US and in Germany, we nd employment gains from technological change and job polarization, whereas, in France, the technological change reduces aggregate employment in a context of job polarization. In the US, an half of these employment gains are due to the technological change, and the other half to the changes in the LMI, the contribution of the rise in share of skilled worker being negligible. In France, the change in LMI aects new job opportunities in manual jobs: the reallocation of routine workers towards manual jobs is obstructed for want of job creations of manual services. Hence, without technological change, the fall in French employment would have been cut by 70%. The model also predicts that, without the increase in skilled labor supply, the fall in French employment would have doubled. The improvement in educational attainment dampened the unfavorable consequences of technological change. we show that Germany transforms this structural change in employment gains, only after the labor reforms implemented after the middle of the 90s.
Keywords: Search and matching, job polarization, reallocation, labor market institutions.
JEL Classication: E24, J62, J64, O33
Institute for Economic Theory II, Spandauer Str. 1, 10178 Berlin. Email address: albertij@cms.hu-berlin.de Email address: jean-olivier.hairault@univ-paris1.fr
Email address: flangot@univ-lemans.fr
Email address: Thepthida.Sopraseuth@u-cergy.fr
¶This research was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 Economic Risk. We thank Andrea Bassanini, Michael Burda, Federico Cingano, Alain Delacroix, Grégory Jolivet, Stephano Scarpetta and Hélène Turon for helpful comments as well as participants to Aussois winter school (2015), Bristol seminar (2015), T2M conference (Berlin, 2015), UQAM seminar (2015), Société Canadienne de Sciences Economiques (Montréal, 2015), conference in honor of C. Pissarides (Paris, 2015)
1

1 Introduction
This paper develops a multi-sectorial search and matching model with endogenous occupational choice to shed light on the way structural changes aect aggregate employment. The originality of our approach is to analyze the dynamic path of the employment reallocations. Indeed, the transformations of the production process have been progressive, driven by an incremental implementation of new technologies. The originality of our approach is to analyze the dynamic path of the employment reallocations. Indeed, the transformations of the production process have been progressive, driven by an incremental implementation of new technologies. During this structural change, some jobs can disappear, some others can appear only during the transitional path, whereas the composition of the employment of the nal steady state is only the end of this reallocation process. This reallocation process can be long, because occupational changes result from search and learning activities from new tasks. Hence, we propose an non-stationary model that allows to understand these employment movements during a structural change. Thus, we point that some labor market institutions (hereafter LMI) can block this reallocation process because they do allow the labor market to open some jobs for inexperienced workers on potential new jobs. By identifying the direction of the structural change by new technologies that suppress jobs in the middle of the wage distribution, our model explains also the job polarization and inequalities observed in the US and
in European countries.1
In our paper, Autor & Dorn (2013) meet Mortensen & Pissarides (1994) (hereafter MP). Our work then bridges the gap between two strands of literature.
The rst strand of literature, in the wake of MP seminal work, tries to identify the reasons behind the low employment level in Europe compared to the US (the so-called "European employment problem", Ljungqvist & Sargent (2008), Ljungqvist & Sargent (1998)). Since the empirical works of Blanchard & Wolfers (1999), this literature lays stress on the role of LMI in interaction with aggregate shocks in shaping transatlantic dierences in employment rates and on the role of structural reforms in improving European employment levels.
The second strand of literature deals with the employment structure, and the dynamic of wages across skill groups. Over the last 30 years in the US (and the last 20 years in Europe) employment growth has been fast not only in both high-paid (abstract) jobs but also in low-paid (manual) jobs; employment levels signicantly fall among middling (routine) jobs, those involving tasks that can be replaced by machines (Autor & Dorn (2013); Goos et al, 2009, 2014). Unlike in the case of the SBTC theory, job polarization implies that, within the group of unskilled workers, there are winners (workers in service jobs,which require non-routine manual task and mainly involve assisting for others -e.g. janitors, cleaners, child care) and losers (middle-skilled, routine workers - e.g. production and craft, operative and assembler, and transportation, construction, mechanical).
The paper aims bridging the gaps between these two strands of literature by studying the strong interaction between the level and the structure of employment (in terms of opportunities for skilled vs. unskilled workers), and by assessing the contribution of technological change, evolution of LMI and changes in supply in skill labor in shaping the employment level and structure in the past decades. It also shows that the empirical literature that puts emphasis on the dynamic of employment shares, misses something by forgetting the employment levels. Indeed, the evolution of employment shares are sucient to indicate employment reallocations from the declining (routine)
1 Job polarization relates to the disappearance of middle jobs (requiring a moderate level of skills, such as autoworkers' jobs) relative to those at the bottom, requiring few skills (such as cleaners, sales and elementary occupations for instance), and those at the top (managers, life science and professionals), requiring greater skill levels.
2

to the expanding (manual) activities only if the aggregate employment increases. But, this is not

the case when aggregate employment decreases. More precisely, let us denote Si = Ni/N the

employment

share

of

occupation

i,

then

Si Si

=

Ni Ni

-

N N

.

If the level of aggregate employment

is neglected, ie

N N

= 0, then an increase in

Si Si

implies an increase in

Ni Ni

.

If the aggregate

employment grows, then the statistics on shares are also sucient because when the share increases,

jobs are created.

But, if aggregate employment falls (French case), then

Si Si

> 0 and

N N

< 0 can

be

compatible

with

Ni Ni

< 0.

For

example,

with

the

French

data

(1980-2000),

we

have

Levels
I nitial M anual 37 Routine 63
T otal 100

Shares

F inal

I nitial

33  M anual 37%

46 Routine 63%

79

F inal 42% 58%

While the share of manual jobs increases, manual jobs are also destroyed, and there is no netreallocation. Hence, employment levels matter, and thus the LMI as well as their shifts during the structural change.
We consider the cases of three large OECD economies representative of alternative institutional settings, having the potential to induce divergent time-paths in the evolution of labor market outcomes
during the process of technological transition: i) The US, where exible wages and institutions ease technology-induced job reallocation. ii) France, the polar case with a rigid labor market, a minimum
wage that increases over time in real terms, and an evolution of LMI that can potentially stall ag-
gregate unemployment and job reallocation. iii) Germany, an intermediate case. The German labor
market is rather rigid, but does not feature a "national" minimum wage (but with sector-specic wage "norms"). The evolution of LMI rst stalled job reallocation, but then reversed in the second period of the technological transition (a outcome of the labor market reforms began in the middle of the 90s). The 3 countries were chosen to illustrate divergent time-path of LMI along the same technological transition. In addition, these countries are all characterized by job polarization but also by contrasting evolutions of the aggregate employment level. This provides the opportunity to illustrate the interaction between the level of employment and its structure across task groups.
Our results are the following.

· After estimating the model, we check the model's ability to match the evolution of aggre-
gate employment and employment shares by task. We document the theoretical interactions between technological change and LMI in a search and matching framework.
· We then look at the model's predictions regarding inequalities. The model captures the
evolution of wage and income inequalities across countries and over time. We then lay stress on the dierence between inequalities in wage and income versus inequalities in "permanent" income. While the former provides a "static" measure of inequalities, the latter takes into account future employment opportunities across sectors. We push forward the view that this "dynamic" measure should be the appropriate indicator for policy-makers. Using this dynamic measure, the French economy appears as unequal as the US. The US, with a exible labor market, high labor reallocation towards manual jobs and low unemployment benets are characterized by high Gini coecients at the end of the technological transition. French Gini is actually located at the same level. Indeed, in spite of generous unemployment benet and social programs, France does not provide enough future job opportunities. This outweighs the

3

rising generosity of the minimum wage as well as of the income granted by existing assistance programs and unemployment benets.
Given this good t of the model, we use it to understand the evolution of aggregate employment and employment shares observed in the past decades. We compute the counterfactual evolution of aggregate employment without technological change or the rise in the supply of skilled labor, thereby quantifying the contribution of each element in the understanding of the evolution of aggregate employment and employment shares in the past decades. We contrast 2 countries: US and France.
· In the US, we nd employment gains from technological changes. The model predicts that,
without technological change (without the rise in skilled labor), the rise in US employment would have been cut by half (by 20%).
· In France, we nd that technological change reduce employment, and generates job polar-
ization. French aggregate employment would actually been higher in the past without technological changes. The fall in aggregate employment would have been cut by 70% without technological change. This is due to the fact that, because of rigid LMI, especially minimum wage that aect new job opportunities in manual jobs, labor reallocation does not occur. Routine workers lose their jobs, but cannot reallocate towards manual jobs, whose creation is stalled. The share of service in aggregate employment in France only mirrors the fall in aggregate employment. Hence, France, through its LMI, transform new opportunities into losses for its workforce. The model also predicts that, without the increase in skill labor, the fall in employment would have doubled. The improvement in educational attainment dampened the unfavorable consequences of technological change.
Section 2 presents our contribution to the literature. We look at the data in section 3 then present the model in Section 4, the calibration and estimation strategy in section 5. Results on the model t and predicted inequalities are reported in section 6. We also document the theoretical interactions between technological change and LMI in a search and matching framework. In section 7, we quantify the contribution of technological change, changes in LMI and rise in the supply of skilled labor in the understanding of the evolution of aggregate employment and employment shares in the past decades. We contrast 2 countries: US and France. Section 8 concludes.
2 Contribution to the literature
In our paper, Autor & Dorn (2013) meet Mortensen & Pissarides (1994). What insight can be gained from the interaction between two strands of literature?
2.1 Job polarization with search and matching frictions
Autor & Dorn (2013) propose a model of frictionless labor reallocation across sectors. There is full employment on unskilled and skilled labor market. In addition, the supply of skilled and unskilled labor is constant.
The introduction of search and matching alters the theoretical predictions on the dynamics of polarization. Even in the US, hiring takes times, labor reallocation is then sluggish. In the short and medium run, unemployment dynamics is aected by the search process when unskilled workers
4

switch from one job to the other. With search frictions, even in a exible labor market such as the US, transitional "technological unemployment" appears because of the fast shutting down of routine labor opportunities, while reallocation to manual jobs takes time. The dynamic process of labor reallocation is also aected by LMI. Our contribution with respect to Autor and Dorn's model lies not only in taking into account search frictions but also in adding an international perspective by looking at dierent institutional settings. By looking at France and Germany, we will illustrate 2 striking elements. First, polarization (as summarized by changes in employment shares in each task cannot) can be understood only with respect to the evolution of aggregate employment. The French case will be striking. The share of service in total employment in France can actually increase only because of the fall in aggregate employment. Hence, the share of service in total
employment per se is not relevant to measure the extent of polarization in one country with falling
aggregate employment. Secondly, we will show how French LMI can slow down labor reallocation from routine to manual jobs. We will stress the importance of wage-setting rules in the dynamics of job polarization and illustrate our results in 3 countries characterized by very dierent wage-setting arrangements and evolutions of aggregate employment.
2.2 Search and matching frictions with polarization in a context of technological change
Papers focusing on the European employment problem focus on the level of employment but discard the study of the employment, wage dynamics across skill groups and inequalities. However, the extent employment reallocation is signicantly aected by labor market institutions (LMI), with excess rigidities potentially able to prevent rms and workers to seize opportunities created by technological changes. These interactions might be crucial to our understanding of the "European employment problem". The impact of technological changes have been explored in the search and matching literature ( Mortensen & Pissarides (1998); Hornstein et al. (2007)). We extent their work by laying stress on transitional dynamics (rather than steady state). In addition, along the transitional path, we document the interaction between technological change, labor market institutions and occupational choice. Occupational choices have also been explored in the search and matching literature (Alvarez & Shimer (2011); Carrillo-Tudela & Visschers (2014)). We extend their work by looking at occupational changes in a context of technological changes, rather than in a business cycle perspective. This signicantly alters the theoretical analysis since occupational decisions are made in a non-stationary environment. In particular, in our model, occupational
mobility are ows towards the bottom of the wage distribution, where employment opportunities
are expanding.
Finally, in both strands of literature, the supply of skilled labor is xed. We will relax this assumption and explore the quantitative implications of rising supply of skilled labor (as observed in the data). We will quantify the contribution of the rise in skilled labor in sustaining the rise in employment along the transitional path.
3 Data analysis in the US, France and Germany
A glance at the data suggests that the interaction between the level and the structure of employment can be complex.
5

3.1 Pervasive job polarization
Let us rst have a look at polarization. Figure 1 reports the evolution of share of employment in the US, France and Germany in 3 tasks: abstract (non routine, cognitive tasks requiring creativity, problem-solving), routine (repetitive, specic activities accomplished by following well-dened instructions and procedures) and manual (non routine job requiring human interaction) jobs. The data comes from OECD computations based on CPS US data, French and German labor surveys. Total employment by occupational groups is disaggregated by occupational groups. Occupations are then divided into abstract, routine or manual jobs based on Goos and Manning (2009) classication. The data suggest that job polarization is prevalent in the US, France and Germany, with a rising employment share of service manual jobs and abstract jobs along with a pervasive fall in routine jobs.
Figure 1: Job polarization: Changes in employment share in abstract, routine, and manual tasks
50
45
40
Manual Germany Routine Germany 35 Abstract Germany Manual France Routine France 30 Abstract France Manual US Routine US Abstract US 25
20
15
Source: OECD computations based on CPS US data, French and German labor surveys.
3.2 Divergent changes in aggregate employment across countries
Notice also that, although job polarization is at work in the US as well as in 2 core countries of continental Europe, aggregate employment has evolved very dierently with a striking rise in aggregate employment in the US between 1980 and 2000, a rise that begin after 1990 in Germany and a downward trend in aggregate employment in France until the end of 90s (Figure 2).
Figures 1 and 2 suggest that job polarization must be understood in relation with the evolution of the level of aggregate employment, and can imply very dierent amounts of underlying reallocation. Indeed, in Figure 1, the US employment share of service occupation jobs has increased by only 6% over the last 30 years. Given the rapid rise in the US aggregate employment level in the 1980s and 1990s, however, this apparently limited increase actually involves large labor reallocations from routine to manual jobs. The evolution of the labor supply, where the supply of skilled workers increases, makes this increase in the share of manual tasks even more remarkable. In contrast, in a country like France the increasing share of workers in service occupations might just be mirroring
6

Figure 2: Employment rates

0.85 US data

US trend

0.8

France data France trend

Germany data

0.75 Germany trend

0.7

0.65

0.6

0.515980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010
Source: OECD computations based on CPS US data, French and German labor surveys.
a mere mechanical eect of the fall in overall employment: in an extreme case where all new red workers from the routine sector had become permanently non-employed, constant levels of jobs in abstract and manual tasks would have been enough to lead to a rise in their respective employment shares. This point is missed in the current literature on skilled/unskilled workers. This paper therefore provides a tool for assessing the impact of LMI on the aggregate level of employment as well as wage and employment dynamics across skill groups. We will also be able to contrast short-run and long-term eects by looking at the transition path induced by technological changes.

4 A search and matching model with endogenous occupational choice in a context of technological change
The model is a dynamic general equilibrium model with search and matching frictions, featuring workers' endogenous occupational choice and job polarization induced by a deterministic task-biased technological change. In order to make the model tractable, we abstract from nancial markets. There are no savings. Figure 3 displays the building blocks of the model.
4.1 Assumptions
The economy consists of 2 sectors: the good-producing sector and manual non-routine services. They are displayed in the middle of Figure 3. The good producing sector uses three inputs: i)
high-skilled workers in abstract non-routine cognitive jobs La, ii) unskilled workers employed in routine Lr , repetitive tasks and iii) technology K (equipment, computers, machine), a good that
can also perform repetitive tasks. Unskilled routine workers can be easily replaced by machines while abstract workers complement repetitive tasks (whether performed by machines or unskilled
workers). Technological change is captured by a downward trend in the price of computers pK , which
7

Figure 3: Building blocks of the model

High Skill workers

Low Skill worker

Technological change

Capital whose price falls due to technological
progress

  

Occupational choice

Search and matching

Search and matching

Good sector:

Production with skilled labor  and
routine tasks
(CES basket of unskilled labor  and capital )

Service sector:
Production with unskilled labor only 

Consumers' Demand for goods and services : (Skilled and unskilled,
Employed and non employed consumers)
Consume CES basket of service and goods

creates a strong incentive for good-producing rms to substitute unskilled labor Lr for capital K . The service sector employs only unskilled labor in non-routine manual tasks Lm (such as janitors,
cleaners, etc. occupations involving assisting others).
4.2 Labor supply and labor ows
In this section, we have a closer look at the top of Figure 3, with a focus on labor allocation. This part of the model mimics Autor & Dorn (2013)'s model. Labor supply consists of skilled and unskilled workers (Figure 4). Skilled workers are homogeneous and all perform abstract tasks (nonroutine, cognitive jobs) in the good-producing rm. There is a continuum of unskilled workers who
dier with respect to their abilities . The model endogenously determines which unskilled workers
occupy routine occupations versus service occupations (through the endogenous determination of
the ~ below which workers choose to work in manual jobs). Occupational choices, by aecting
the number of workers in each unemployment pool, directly alter unemployment rates in each sector of the economy as well as job nding probabilities. Low-skill workers have homogeneous (heterogeneous) skills at performing manual (routine) tasks. This is consistent with the view that blue-collar workers in the factory dier in performing their tasks on the assembly line while jobs
such as janitors can hardly dier in terms of productivity in providing non-routine manual services2.
We depart from Autor & Dorn (2013) by considering the upward trend in educational attainment (as observed in the data), which shifts the relative labor supply of skill labor. In Figure 4, the share of abstract workers expand with time. This element was discarded in the job polarization literature and turn out to play a sizable role in the polarization process.
Labor market ows and occupational choices are summarized in Figure 5. This part of the model departs from Autor & Dorn (2013)'s setting in which labor reallocation is frictionless. Skilled workers
2 The model proposes a stylized mapping of skilled and jobs. The data might suggest that the real world involves more complex mobility. However, we argue that our stylized model captures the salient mobility involved in job polarization and changes in aggregate employment.
8

Figure 4: Workers

Low-skilled

High-skilled

Endogenous Threshold 
Heterogeneous ability 

Manual Non-routine Service
homogeneous skills at performing manual tasks

Routine (substitute for K)
heterogeneous skills in performing routine tasks
Production of good

Abstract Non-routine Cognitive
Homogeneous high skill level

are employed in abstract tasks. When red, they join the pool of unemployed skilled workers and look for an abstract job. Unskilled workers can be employed either in routine tasks in the good producing rm or in manual tasks in the service sector. When red from the good-producing rms,
routine unemployed workers can choose to switch occupation (we call them new movers Lnm) and join
the pool of unemployed workers looking for manual jobs. New movers dier from other unemployed workers looking for a manual jobs because i) their unemployment benet depends on their past occupation as routine workers, ii) they just arrived on the market for manual jobs and lack proper information about the tasks and rms on the market. New movers gradually learn about the tasks and the market: their productivity as manual workers is lower than their counterparts.

SKILLED WORKERS

Figure 5: Labor market ows

Employed skilled workers
Abstract tasks
Unemployed skilled workers
Abstract tasks

UNSKILLED WORKERS

Employed unskilled workers routine tasks

Employed unskilled workers manual tasks

Choice of occupation

Employed unskilled workers
learning process

Unemp. unskilled worker searching for routine jobs

Unemp. unskilled worker searching for manual jobs
MOVERS

Unemp. unskilled worker searching for
manual jobs

Labor markets are characterized by search and matching frictions à la Mortensen & Pissarides
(1994). Search is directed as there is a labor sub-market for each occupation and for each ability
9

level  in routine jobs. Within each pool, the meeting process between workers and rms is random. There is no one-the-job search. Mt, the number of hiring per period, in each segment of the labor market (abstract, routine for each ability level  and all manual labor), is determined by a constant
returns to scale matching function:

Mi = ViUi1-, 0 <  < 1

(1)

with i = a, s, r, m, mn.  > 0 is a scale parameter measuring the eciency of the matching function, Vt the number of vacancies and Ut the number of non employed workers.  is the elasticity of the matching function with respect to vacancies. A vacancy is lled with probability qi = Mi/Vi and the job nding probability per unit of worker search is fi = Mi/Ui. The labor market tightness is measured by the ratio Vi/Ui.
A job can be destroyed for exogenous reasons at rate s. Endogenous separation occurs in case of
real wage rigidity, in which case, a ring cost is incurred. Two remarks must be made at this stage. First, ring costs are not severance payment but rather administrative costs of lay-o procedures. They are pure losses. Secondly, endogenous separations occur in our model because some rms incur negative prots, especially in the routine segment of the labor market. Recall that, in a world of continuous technological change, we can expect routine wages to fall, in which case, the rm would not be likely to incur negative prots, even in a world with falling routine labor productivity. In contrast, it is only when wages are completely rigid that rms can be trapped between production costs and falling labor productivity. This situation leads to negative prots. The rm then closes down, therefore incurs ring costs. In the model, for each ability level in routine jobs, in case of rigid wages only, we can endogenously dene a scrapping-time after which the rm shuts down.

4.3 Workers' value functions, occupational choices and demand for goods

The economy includes goods and services. All equations are expressed in real terms in terms of
goods. ps is the relative price of services in terms of goods, and P the consumer price index, which is a function of ps.
The worker's value functions3 are

Wa = wa + T + [(1 - s)Wa,+1 + sUa,+1]
Wr() = wr() + Tt +[(1 - s)Wr,+1() + s max{Ur,+1(), Umn ,+1()}]
Wm = wm + T + [(1 - s)Wm,+1 + sUm,+1] Wmo = wmo + T + [(1 - s)Wm,+1 + sUm,+1]
+(1 - )[(1 - s)Wmo ,+1 + sUmo ,+1] Wmn () = wmn () + T + [(1 - s)Wm,+1 + sUm,+1]
+(1 - )[(1 - s)Wmn,+1() + sUmo ,+1]

(2) (3) (4) (5) (6)

where, within manual workers, we distinguish tree type of workers: the experienced manual worker
(Wm), the inexperienced manual entitled to an unemployment benet indexed on wage of a routine job (Wmn ), and the experienced manual entitled to an unemployment benet indexed on wage of a
3For the easiness of the exposure we drop time subscript for present variable. Expected variables are assigned a
subscript +1.

10

manual job (Wmo ). T denotes the transfers perceived by individuals (dividends and surplus of the
governments). For unemployed workers,

Ua = psh + za + T + [(1 - fa)Ua,+1 + faWa,+1]
Um = psh + zm + T + [(1 - fm)Um,+1 + fmWm,+1] Ur() = psh + zr() + T + [(1 - fr()) max{Ur,+1(), Umn ,+1()} + fr()Wr,+1()]
Umo = psh + zm + T + [(1 - fmo )Umo ,+1 + fmo Wmo ,+1] Umn () = psh + zr() + T + [(1 - fmn ())Umn ,+1() + fmn ()Wmn,+1()]

(7) (8) (9) (10) (11)

Equation (2) refers to the value of employment for an abstract worker with wa the associated wage and Ua,+1 the value of unemployment next period. Equation (4) is the equivalent for workers in
the manual sector. In the worker's value of employment (Equation (3)), the occupational choice is
captured by the term max{Ur,+1(), Umn ,+1()} when unemployed. The exogenous destruction rate s then regulates the pace at which workers face the opportunity of switching occupation. If routine
workers switch occupation when unemployed, they join the pool of unemployed workers looking for
a manual job. Within this pool, we have to distinguish 3 groups: (1) Regular job seekers who got
red from a manual job (Equation (8)) who gets unemployment benets zm. (2) New movers who
just joined the pool after being red from a routine job. They then get unemployment benet based
on their past occupation and ability  (zr() in equation (11)), which then aects their bargained wage when they nd a job in the manual sector (wmn () in equation (6)). (3) Old movers are routine
workers who switched occupation to manual and had access to one manual job, got red from this
manual job and now get unemployment benets zm in equation (10). Their bargained wage wmo does not depend on their ability level . The constant h stands for the leisure and home production.

For tractability reasons, we use directed search such that each type of unemployed worker in the pool (Equations (8), (10) and (11)) has a corresponding job value (Equations (4), (5) and (6)).
All movers, whether old or new, can get a regular manual job with probability . This regulates
the pace of the learning process from routine workers who switched occupation and are not fully informed about the new tasks and vacancies in the manual sector. This is consistent with the view that an important component of human capital is task and occupation-specic (Poletaev & Robinson (2008), Kambourov & Manovskii (2009), Cortes (2015)), which is lost by the worker who switches task.

4.4 Good-producing rm
As in Autor & Dorn (2013), the production function in the good sector uses skilled labor and an aggregate of low-tech input (that includes unskilled labor and capital). Unskilled labor and capital are very substitutable to perform routine repetitive tasks while skilled labor and repetitive tasks are more complements. We assume the same production function as in Autor & Dorn (2013). However, because of wage bargaining for both skilled and unskilled workers, we need to preserve the constant return to scale in the bargaining process. As a result, we present the good-producing rm as using
two separate inputs: one is abstract workers La, the other is the aggregate of unskilled labor and
capital. The good-producing rm's problem is
g = max {Y g - pz1Z1 - pz2Z2}
s.t. Y g  AZ1Z21-

11

The behavior of the rms producing high-tech intermediate good Z1 is z1 = max pz1Y z1 - waLa - Vaca + z+11

s.t. Y z1  La La,+1 = (1 - s)La + qaVa

(12) (13)

For high-tech rms, the production Y z1 is linear function (Equation (12)), and rms pay search cost to hire new workers: ca is the cost of posting a vacancy for an abstract job.
The behavior of the rms producing low-tech intermediate goods Z2 is

z2 = max

pz2Y z2 - pkK -  wr()Lr() -c  Vr() -  l()F + +z21

  

1


s.t. Y z2  (1 - µ) Lr() + (µK)

S

Lr,+1() = (1 - s)Lr() + qr()Vr() - l+1()

l()  (1 - s)Lr() (())

V ()  0

(µ())

(14)
(15) (16) (17)

For low-tech rms whose value is z2, Y z2 denotes the intermediate good production, K the com-

puter stock, pK its price and c the cost of posting a vacancy. F is the ring costs. It is discussed

later. Equation (14) is the production function with  and µ  (0, 1). The elasticity of substitution

between routine labor and computer capital is

1 1-

and, by assumption, is greater than 1.

Equations

(15) and (13) capture the evolution of labor stock given the probability of lling q a vacancy V .

Equation (16) gives the maximum number of -type workers that can be red (those who are not

exogenously separated). Finally, equation (17) allows to distinguish between two regimes: the rst
where it is protable for the rm to replace the exogenous separations (Vr() > 0), and the second, where it is optimal to voluntarily reduce its workforce (Vr() = 0).4

4.5 Service-producing rm

The representative rm's problem

s = max

psY s - wmLm +  wmn ()Lnm() + wmo Lom -cVm - c  Vmn() - cVmo + +s 1

4FOCs are reported in Appendix A.1.

12

s.t. Y s  As Ls +  Lmn () + Lom

Lm,+1 = (1 - s)Lm + qmVm + (1 - s) Lnm() + (1 - s)Lmo

Lmo ,+1 = (1 - s)(1 - )Lom + qmo Vmo Lnm,+1() = (1 - s)(1 - )Lnm() + qmn ()Vmn()

(18)
(19) (20) (21)

with As > 0 a relative productivity parameter (with respect to good). The service production function (equation (18)) uses all low-skilled workers, including new and old movers: Lm, Lmn () and Lmo .  captures the lower productivity of workers who switched occupation and are not fully familiar
with manual tasks. Notice that ps is the relative price of services relative to goods. For simplicity,
we assume, as it is the case in the scenarii chosen for the simulations, that we have always V > 0, which allows us to abstract from the constraints V  0 and the existence of rings l > 0.5

4.6 Job creation conditions and creation costs

We consider that rms are subject to a cost of advertising the vacant job (ca or c) Job creation
conditions are given by

c q = J+1
c = ca, c q = qa, qr(), qm, qmn , qmo J+1 = Ja,+1, Jr,+1(), Jm,+1, Jmn ,+1, Jmo ,+1

(22)

Together with the rm present values of a lled job, we obtain the following job creation condition for skilled workers:

ca qa

=



ya,+1

-

wa,+1

+

(1

-

sa)

ca qa,+1

whereas for unskilled workers, the job creation conditions are:

c qr ( )

=



yr,+1()

-

wr,+1()

+

(1

-

s)

c qr,+1

()

c qmn ()

=

 ps,+1As - wmn ,+1() + (1 - s)

c(1 - ) c qmn ,+1() + qm,+1

c qmo

=

 ps,+1As - wmo ,+1 + (1 - s)

c(1 - ) c

qmo ,+1

+ qm,+1

cc qm =  ps,+1As - wm,+1 + (1 - sa) qm,+1

For these unskilled workers, the -type matters: the endogenous segmentation of the labor market determines the threshold  such that for  <  workers are in the market of manual tasks, whereas for    they are in the labor market of the routine tasks.
5 FOCs are reported in Appendix A.2.

13

4.7 Wage setting

The 3 countries dier with respect to their wage setting: these dierences correspond to specic adjustments to a targeted wage which is the solution of a bargaining process à la Nash. Before going into the institutional specicity in each country, it is thus useful to present the Nash bargaining
between individual workers and rms for each type of job (abstract, routine for each  and manual
regular, old or new mover). The wage is set so as to maximize the joint surplus from the match

wNash = argmax (Ji - Vi)1- (Wi - Ui) with i = a, r, s, m, mn

(23)

with J - V the marginal value of a match for a rm and W - U the marginal worker's surplus from the match.  denotes the worker's share of a job's value, i.e., worker's bargaining power.

· In the DMP model, a Nash bargaining gives the W S (wage setting) curve: the wage is highly
exible and follows both productivity and labor market tightness.
· A rst real wage rigidity à la Hall (2005): social norms reduce the wage exibility (Germany).
· A second real rigidity: a "Minimum wage" by tasks that can disconnect wage from the pro-
ductivity (France).

For all jobs, we have the following WS rule:

w = max{mw, wB} with wB = w + (1 - )wNash

using all Bellman equations W, U, V and J , and the free entry conditions V = 0, the Nash wages
are:
Abstract jobs:

wa

=

a

ya

+

a,+1 a

caa

+

a(1

-

sa)

ca qa

1 - a,+1 a

+ (1 - )(psh + za)

where

a

=

a 1-a

.

This equation shows that the bargained surplus captured by employees is the

sum of: (i) the marginal productivity and (ii) the search returns. For the worker, the returns on

the search process are equal to the discounted time duration to nd a job oer; for the rm, returns

are instead equivalent to the discounted time duration to nd a worker. These relative time spans

cannot

be

proxied

by

the

ratio

of

the

average

duration

for

these

two

search

processes

(a

=

fa qa

),

as

it would be the case when bargaining powers are constant (a,+1/a = 1 in this case). But, if, for

example, the workers expect that tomorrow their bargaining powers are close to zero (t+1  0),

the evaluation of the current match surplus is only driven by the search costs saved by the rm

if

the

job

is

not

destroyed

((1

-

s)

ca qa

).

At the opposite, when the bargaining power of the worker

increases (t+1 > t), the match value must be depreciated by the rm (it expects a decrease in its

bargaining power), whereas the relative time spans must be over-evaluated by the worker because

its bargaining power increases. Thus, the value of the search cost is a function of the bargaining

power and taxes which themselves change over time.

Finally, the reservation wage is sum of the home production with the non-employment incomes.

Unskilled workers

14

For all job occupied by unskilled worker,

we have 

=

 1-

that summarizes the dynamics of

the bargaining power.

(i) Routine:

wr ( )

=



yr ( )

+

+1 

cr ( )

+  c (1 - s) qr ( )

1 - +1 

+(1 - ) psh + zr() + (1 - s - fr) max{0, Umn ,+1() - Ur,+1()}

With respect to the wages of abstract jobs, the novelty comes from the reservation wage. If
they are unemployed, workers know that they can move from routine to manual occupations
if these last ones are more protable: they take into account this new opportunity in their
reservation wage. When Umn > Ur(), this surplus is obtained only if an unemployed worker does not nd a job (with a probability 1 - fr), net of the chance to obtain it directly after a separation (with probability s). This opportunity to move is oered only to unemployed
workers: thus, this increases the reservation wage.
When Umn () > Ur() and given that Umn () is increasing whereas Ur() is decreasing, the
wage of routine job is

wr ( )

=



yr ( )

+

+1 

cmn ()

+  c (1 - s) qr ( )

1 - +1 

+(1 - ) (psh + zr())

This wage is paid to workers on routine jobs, after -type unemployed workers had moved to
the market of manual jobs.

(ii) Manual (incumbent):

wm

=



psAs

+

+1 

cm

+  c (1 - s) 1 - +1 qm 

+(1 - )(psh + zm)

These workers are incumbent: they do not expect any mobility, except the one associated to the unemployment risk. Thus the wage equation is the same as for the "abstract" workers.

(iii) Manual (new movers):

wmn ()

=



psAs

+

+1 

cmn ()

+

c(1 - ) c

qmn ()

+ qm

(1 - s) 1 - +1 

+(1 - ) psh + zr() +  (Umn ,+1() - Um,+1) + s(1 - )(Umn ,+1() - Umo ,+1)

The value of the opportunity to become an experimented worker is included in the reservation
wage of the new movers: this changes workers' outside option Umn ,+1() - Um,+1 with a probability . But workers also know that they can lose the state of "new mover" even if they
do not become experimented: they can lose their "new mover" jobs and become "old mover"
unemployed workers, implying a change in their outside options Umn ,+1() - Umo ,+1. This event can appear with a probability s(1 - ). In the "regular" case, we have Umn ,+1() < Um,+1 and Umn ,+1() > Umo ,+1: the expectation of the promotion leads workers to reduce their reservation

15

wage to increase their opportunities to access this labor market state, whereas the loss of their unemployed benets indexed to the wage of a routine job is a risk shared with the rm that hires an "new mover".

(iv) Manual (old movers):

wmo ()

=



psAs

+

+1 

cmo

+

c(1 - ) c

qmo

+ qm

(1 - s) 1 - +1 

+(1 - ) psh + zm + (Umo ,+1 - Um,+1)

With a probability , these workers become experimented manual workers and then access this new labor market: this changes their outside option by a amount of Umo ,+1 -Um,+1. Notice that, if Umo ,+1 < Um,+1, this leads them to accept lower wages when they are "old movers".

It should be noted that we did not introduce ring costs in the wage negotiation. The reason is that rings are unilaterally decided by rms when the prot is lower than paying ring costs. This
situation only happens when the minimum wage is binding, i.e. when the wage negotiation fails
to prevent the sharing of the fall in prots. As a consequence, ring costs only matter when the
wage reach the statutory level in our model. It follows that wt = mw. One may wonder whether
wages higher than the minimum wage could be inuenced by the ring costs due to future changes in the policy. Since we are in a perfect foresight world, it seems not credible that employers use ring costs as a threat in bargaining to lower wages in a situation that never give rise to endogenous separation. For this reason, we only assume that ring costs impacts the timing of the dismissal decision.
Given that we introduce real rigidities in the bargaining wage wB , the equilibrium is dened only if wrH < wB < wrF , where wrH and wrF dene respectively the reservation wage of the worker and the rm. These reservation wages (or the "bargaining set") are such that W (wrH ) - U = 0 and J (wrF ) = 0. We add these constraints in the numerical algorithm that solve the equilibrium paths
of the general equilibrium model.

4.8 General equilibrium
4.8.1 Household preferences and Demands for goods and services

We present here the elements in the bottom part of Figure 3. The demand for good and service stems from the skilled and unskilled households. They consume goods and services. Both are complements. This is a crucial element. The adoption of new technologies by good-producing rms allows them to expand their production. The resulting fall in the price of good increases the demand for goods. As goods and services are complements, the demand for services also expands. The relative price of services goes up, which also drives the increase in real wages in the service sector, thereby inducing workers to switch occupations from routine to service jobs.

We have several households in the model, one for each type of job and unemployment. In order
to keep the model tractable, there is no savings. All households share the same preferences. Their
consumption basket C include goods Cg and services Cs

C=

Cg + (1 - )Cs

1 

with   [0, 1]

16

with

1 1-

the elasticity of substitution between goods and services.

For each worker, budget con-

straint is

PC = I with I  {wa, wr(), wm, wmo , wmn , za, zm, zr()} + T

The optimal sharing of the consumption basket good C is given by:

ps

=

1- 

Cg 1- Cs



Cg

=

1
 1-

1
1 -1 I PP

Cs

=

1
(1 - ) 1-

ps

1 -1

I

PP

which are the demand functions. The consumer price index is

P=

1 1
 1- + (1 - ) 1- (ps) -1

-1 

(24) (25)

4.8.2 Market clearing conditions

The production of the goods/service equals the demand for nal goods/services from households.

Yg = Ys =

Cgk  Cg
k
Csk  Cs
k

with k  {ae, re(), me, meo, men, au, mu, ru()}

where Y g is the production of the intermediate goods net of hiring and entry costs:

Yg = Yg - pkK - caVa - c Vr()

-cVm - c Vmn() - cVmo

Cs = Y s

4.8.3 Government and transfers
Government expenditures are
 = zaUa + zr()Ur() + zm(Um + Umo ) + zmn ()Umn () + Ch

with the unemployment benet being a function of the productivity6.
zi = iyi
6While unemployment benets are usually proportional to wages, we simplify the denition of zi for tractable
reason. However, it does not matter so much since wage are mainly driven by movements in productivity.

17

Finally, given that rms generate prots, we can also dene total dividends as:
 = z1 + z2 + s

This leads to the following denition of total transfers received by each household (the population

is normalized to unity)

T = - + 

Figure 6 summarizes the sequence of events within a period. Figure 6: Sequence of events within a period

t-1 t

t+1

Separations at rate
sl, sa

Stock of employed and unemployed workers

LLmmn ,,tt() Ls,t Lr,t() La,t

UUmnm,,tt() Us,t Ur,t() Ua,t

Production
in each
sector with Li,t

Vacancy posted Vi,t i=a,r(),m,mn(),s
ps,t determined

Household's occupational choice:
~
threshold 

Wage Bargaining between firms and workers
UI benefits paid to unemployed workers

Matches M(Ui,t,Vi,t)
i=a,r(),m,mn(),s

Stock of employed and unemployed workers

LLmnm,,tt++11() Ls,t+1 Lr,t+1() La,t+1

UUmnm,,tt++11() Us,t+1 Ur,t+1() Ua,t+1

5 Calibration
Regarding the model calibration, some parameter values are set based on existing empirical evidence and others calibrated to match selected moments in the data. Since the paper is focused on trends in employment, the selected moments in the data include employment shares and employment rates at 2 dierent times: the beginning and the end on the sample. Labor market institutions and wage-setting are country-specic while we consider that consumer preferences, technology and distribution of abilities within unskilled labor are the same cross countries. In addition, given that the model predicts the complete path of employment composition and level following a technological
change, we need to set values for the path of labor market institutions, technological change and
increase in skilled labor.
5.1 Exogenous trends : technology, LMI and supply of skilled labor
We assume that
· Technological change (the fall in the price of computers) starts in 1980 in the US while it
18

starts in 1990 in European countries but, due to a catching-up eect, technological change is
twice faster than in the US. (Figure 7, panel (8)).7
· We take into account the improvement in the population educational attainment: the share
of skilled workers increases at the same pace in all countries, even if the levels in 1980 are not
the same (Figure 7, panel (9)).8
· The evolution of LMI is country-specic and ts general trends found in LMI data (Figure 7)
 US : a continuous decline in assistance programs (unconditional income, not linked to
labor market activities, available to unskilled workers only), replacement ratios and workers' bargaining power.
 France: since the mid-1980s, an upward trend in generosity of assistance programs,
replacement ratios and minimum wage.
 Germany: is characterized by 2 sub-periods, with, rst, as in France, an upward trend in
generosity (until the mid-1990s), then, starting in 1995, a reversal on workers' bargaining power and generosity of assistance programs as well as unemployment replacement ratios.
5.2 Calibrated parameters
The calibration is monthly. Some parameters are considered as common to all countries. These parameters include preferences, matching function (panel (a) of Table 1) and speed of learning for
movers (panel (b)). The discount factor  is such that the annual real interest rate is 4%. Skilled workers are not eligible to social assistance programs (hs = 0). The exogenous separation rate is set
to 1.25% per month. This value is consistent with the French and German destruction rates (Elsby et al. (2008)), which we take as a benchmark. If we had taken a higher destruction rate for the US (around 3.5% per month in Elsby et al. (2008)), our results would have implied even more labor
reallocation in the US: indeed, as s regulates the pace at which workers face the occupational choice, with a higher s, reallocation would have been faster in the exible labor market. The elasticity of
the matching function is set to 0.5, which is consistent with the estimates reported in Petrongolo
& Pissarides (2001). The calibration of the vacancy posting cost c is close to the results of Barron
7 The path of technological change across countries is consistent with several empirical evidence. First, the data on the relative price of investment computed by Karabarbounis & Neiman (2014) for the US, France and Germany (Figure 18, in Appendix B) show that the fall in the relative of investment fell in France and Germany especially after the early 1990s while the decline started in the early 1980s in the US. Secondly, Duernecker (2014) reports average ICT investment to GDP ratio for the periods 1980-1990 and 1998-2004 in several OECD countries. This measure is a proxy for technology adoption. In all countries, this ratio has increased over time, which points at faster technological change. Interestingly, the US is characterized by the highest ICT investment to GDP. France and
8Germany lag behind.
We consider the same speed of growth in La in order to make the results comparable across countries. In addition, levels of La are consistent with the values reported in Barro & Lee (2013) for the US in 1980. The values for France are
also consistent with French Census data on educational attainment (INSEE Census data on educational attainment, Baccalauréat et plus, 21% in 1990 and 29.5% in 1999 of population of 16 years old and more). Finally, OECD data suggests that labor supply of abstract workers in Germany was larger than in France in the early 1990s. This is based on the percentage of population that has attained at least upper secondary education in 2009 on chart A1.2 in 2011 OECD Education at a glance, http://www.oecd.org/education/skills-beyond-school/48631602.pdf. The educational attainment for individuals of 55-64 years old is larger in Germany than in France. These individuals were prime-age workers in the 1990s, at the beginning of our technological transition. In order to make the results transparent and comparable across countries, the pace of growth in labor supply of educated workers increase at the same pace in all countries.
19

Figure 7: Calibrated evolution of LMI, technological shock, supply of skill labor

FC 15
10
5
0 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010
a 0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010
hr 0.8

rra 0.6
0.4
0.2
0 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010
u 0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010
hs 0.8

rr 0.6 0.4 0.2
0 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010
MW 1
0.5
0 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010
hm 0.8

0.6 0.6 0.6

0.4 0.4 0.4

1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 pk
1.5
1

1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010
La 0.5
Bench 0.4 Var(1)
Var(2) 0.3

1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010

0.5 0.2
US = solid line; Ge1r98m0 an19y85 =199r0ed 19d95ash2e00d0 -li2n00e5; F20r1a0 nce =19g80ree1n985da1s99h0ed-19l9i5ne;200F0 C200F5 iri2n01g0 Costs; rra replacement ratio for abstract workers; rr replacement ratio of unskilled workers; a abstract workers' bargaining power; u unskilled workers' bargaining power; MW Minimum Wage; ,hr hs and hm social assistance programs (for unskilled workers only in routine job hr and service jobs ,hs new movers hm); pK price of computers; La labor supply of abstract workers.

et al. (1997) and Barron & Bishop (1985). These authors suggest that an amount to 17 percent of a

40-hour workweek (nine applicants for each vacancy lled, with two hours of work time required to

process each application). We also suppose that the work time required to process each application
is twice larger to skilled workers. We set c = .15 given that average productivity in the routine

sector is one. Job creation costs consist of costs for recruitment, screening and training. Acemoglu

(2001) argue that job creation costs are likely to be larger for high-wage jobs. We assume that

job creation costs for abstract jobs are twice larger than for low-wage jobs: ca = 2c. This value

lies within the range found in the literature (Acemoglu (2001) and Krause & Lubik (2006) suggest

ca c

>

1,

ca c

= 1.15

in

Angelopoulos

&

Malley

(2015)

and

4

in

Krause

&

Lubik

(2006)

and

Hagedorn

et al. (2014)).

Panel (b) of Table 1 summarizes the mobility costs. When a routine worker switches occupation,
his productivity in the manual task is  = 90% the ones of a regular manual worker. This is

consistent with the view that an important component of human capital is task and occupation-

specic (Poletaev & Robinson (2008), Kambourov & Manovskii (2009), Cortes (2015)), which is
lost by the worker who switches task. The learning process takes on average 3 years9 for the routine

worker who switch occupation to manual jobs.

91 

months

20

Table 1: Model parameters values based on external information

c
0.15

ca 2c

Matching
 s = sa
0.5 0.0125


0.025

Preferences

 hs

4%

0

Learning

0.9 1


0.025

Labor supply composition

US
0.33 - 0.4

France
0.25 - 0.33

Germany
0.3 - 0.37

Labor Market Institutions

US Fr Ger(1) Ger(2)

 0.3 - 0.15 0.45 - 0.5 0.55 - 0.55 0.55 - 0.4

rr 0.15 - 0.1 0.25 - 0.38 0.275 - 0.37 0.37 - 0.275

sp 0.1 - 0.0875 0.1 - 0.125 0.1125 - 0.1125 0.1125 - 0.095

MW 0-0 0.65 - 0.75 0-0 0-0

: the initial levels hi of social programmes are calibrated
Ger(1): Germany before 1995

Ger(1): Germany after 1995

FC 0 10 5 5

5.3 Estimation strategy.

The other set of parameters  = {1, 2,U S , 2,F , 2,G, 3}:

1 = 2,i = 2,G =

, , A, , µ, , As, pk(0), pk(T ), , ,  a,i, hu,i(0) i=US,F a,G, r,G, hu,G(0)

The dynamics of all the exogenous variables are
x(t) = (x(0) - x(T ))e-gxt + x(T ) for t  [0, T ]

This adds 3 = {gpk , gLa , gr, ghu , gMW } parameters, with dim() = 24.
The empirical targets are:

T =

Na,i(0), Nr,i(0), Nm,i(0), Na,i(T ), Nr,i(T ), Nm,i(T ),

Ei[Na], Ei[Nr], Ei[Nm]

i=U S,F,G

with dim(T ) = 27. 24 parameter values are then estimated to t the 27 moments, by solving min[()-T ]. The model is non-stationary and non-linear, which requires an innovative solution method. The algorithm is presented in Appendix C. The solution for  is reported in the table 2.

6 Model t
6.1 Aggregate employment
Figures 8 and 9 summarize the model's predictions regarding aggregate employment levels and employment rates across skill groups. As for employment rates (top panels of Figure 8), the model

21

Table 2: Calibrated parameters

Preferences Technology (1) Technology (2) Wage norms Adjustments


0.825
A
4.5
pk (0)
1.08
a,U S
0.95
gpk
0.012


0.6
As
0.95
pk(T )
0.48
a,F r
0.1
gLa
0.005

hU S
0.4

0.78

0.8
a,Ger
0.55
grr
0.03

hF r
0.4

0.6

1.65
r,Ger
0.55
ghu
0.03

hGer
0.45
µ
0.5

0.6
gM W
0.02

matches the upward trend found in the US until 2000, that is 20 years after the start of the
technological transition 10
Figure 8 displays the theoretical and observed employment rates for skilled and unskilled workers. In the model as well as in the data, skilled and unskilled workers benet from technological change: the balance between falling routine and rising manual is positive, showing the positive eects of reallocation. The model is also able to capture the fall in the French unemployment rate. The rebound in 2000 is missed in the model. In our view, this employment hike is related to the French extensive program of cuts on payroll taxes for low-wage workers starting in 1998. This resulted in an increase in the employment rate of unskilled workers. This policy change is missed in the model.

6.2 Job polarization
6.2.1 Model t
The model captures the job polarization in all countries (Figure 9). The theoretical predictions are consistent with the levels of employment shares as well as their evolution, especially the starting and ending points (with the exception of the French routine and service share at the start of the sample). The model's predictions are slightly dierent from the data for Germany but the trend is consistent with the data.

6.2.2 Job polarization in a search and matching model : Economic mechanisms at work
Frictional labor market and the long run impact of the Task Biased Technological Change Figure 10 illustrates the mechanisms at work in the model, in countries without minimum
wage (US and Germany). In each labor market (routine, manual and abstract tasks, Figure 10,
panels (1)-(3)), the equilibrium is determined as the intersection of the job creation condition
(J C ) and the wage curve (W C ). J C is a decreasing relation between the ratio "vacancies over unemployment", tightness (), and wage (w): it indicates that hiring intensity declines with the labor cost. W C is an increasing relationship between  and w, showing that workers ask for a higher
wage when their relative scarcity is large. The general equilibrium eects are captured by the usual
AD/AS model, in each market, goods and services (Figure 10, panels (4)-(6)). Finally, the last
10 The model misses the fall in the employment rate since 2000. However, this contraction is essentially explained by the reduction in labor force participation of youth (staying longer in education) and the increase in disability rates among adults (see e.g. OECD, 2014): OECD Employment Outlook 2014, Box 1.1 and Annex Table B. Neither factor is modeled in the analysis, though.

22

Figure 8: Model vs Data - aggregate employment. Model's prediction on aggregate employment in the US, France and Germany.

US Employment rate 1

France Employment rate 1

Germany Employment rate 1

Model Model Model

Data Data Data 0.9 0.9 0.9

0.8 0.8 0.8

0.7 0.7 0.7

0.6 0.6 0.6

0.5 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015

0.5 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015

0.5 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015

US: Employment rates by skill 1
skilled
0.9 Unskilled

France: Employment rates by skill 1
skilled
0.9 Unskilled

Germany: Employment rates by skill 1
skilled
0.9 Unskilled

0.8 0.8 0.8

0.7 0.7 0.7

0.6 0.6 0.6

0.5 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015

0.5 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015

0.5 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015

relationship summarizes occupational choices with the threshold ~ under which it is optimal for routine workers of ability  to switch from routine to manual tasks (Figure 10, panel(5)): given that
the ability increases the productivity for the routine tasks whereas it does not aect it on manual
tasks, the incentive to hire, and thus the tightness, raises with , whereas for the tightness for the manual tasks is independent from .
The impact of the Task Bias Technological Change (TBTC) can be decomposed as follows:

· The direct impact of technological change (From E0 to E1 in Figure 10)
 The decline in the computer price reduce the marginal productivity of the routine task
(they are replaced by computers). This shifts down the J C curve in panel (1) of Figure 10. Part of this lost competitiveness is absorbed by a wage reduction (the W C curve
shifts up as wage are partly indexed on productivity change). The total eect is a decline in both tightness and wages for these workers.
 At the opposite, TBTC increases the productivity of abstract tasks (J C shifts up in
panel 3). Despite a crowding eect induced by wage bargaining (W C curve shifts down),
the total eect is an increase in both tightness and wages for these workers.
 This supply shock shifts down the AS in the good market (the AS curve shifts down in
the panel 4), and for a given level of , the protability of routine task declines, leading the curve r() to rotate to the right (panel 5).
· General equilibrium eect : Taking into account the expansion in demand and the rise in the relative price of service (E2 in Figure 10).

23

Figure 9: Model vs Data - Employment share. Model's prediction on employment shares by task in the US,France and Germany.

US Abstract 0.5
0.45
0.4

US Routine 0.5

US Service

Model 0.45 Data

0.25 0.4

0.35
0.3 Model Data
0.25 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010

0.35 0.3 0.25 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010

0.2
Model Data 0.15 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010

0.5 0.45 0.4 0.35 0.3 0.25
1990

France Abstract
Model Data 1995 2000 2005 2010

0.5 0.45 0.4 0.35 0.3 0.25
1990

France Routine

Model Data

1995 2000 2005 2010

France Service
0.25
0.2 Model Data
0.15 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010

0.5 0.45 0.4 0.35 0.3 0.25
1990

Germany Abstract
Model Data 1995 2000 2005 2010

0.5 0.45 0.4 0.35 0.3 0.25
1990

Germany Routine

Model Data

1995 2000 2005 2010

Germany Service
0.25
0.2 Model Data
0.15 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010

 This supply shock also generates additional incomes. Demand for goods and services
increase. In panels (4) and (6) of Figure 10, demand AD shifts to the right. Given that
the goods market is also aect by the positive supply shock, the increase in the price
of the services is necessarily larger than the one observed in the goods market. Hence,
the relative price of the services ps increases, hence the marginal gains of each produced
services.
 The feedback eect on the labor market magnies the initial impact of the supply shock.
Indeed, the marginal return of services goes up: this leads to a shift up (down) of the
J C (W C ) curve in the labor market of the manual tasks (panel (3) of Figure 10). This
higher returns of service entices more worker to move towards service jobs (the horizontal
line representing the value of s shifts up in the panel (5) of Figure 10).

These adjustments show that job polarization can also be described by a matching model. The value added of a matching model comes from its ability to account for persistence in the adjustment dynamics, and to its exibility to introduce labor market institutions.

Why does time for reallocation matter? Given that the employment state is always preferred
to unemployment, occupational choices, ie. the decision to search for a "routine" or a "manual"
job, are governed by unemployment values.11 These unemployment values depend on two main
components: the expected gains (wages and benets) and the time duration of an unemployment
11Only situations where the employment value is larger than the unemployment value in "routine" or "manual"
labor markets for a -type worker. Employed workers always prefer their "insider" positions.

24

Figure 10: The TBTC in a model with labor market frictions

r() (1) routine tasks

s

WC

(2) manual tasks a WC

(3) abstract tasks WC

 

 

 

JC wr()

JC ws

JC wa

pg

(4) good market  s (5) occupational choice ps

(6) service market

 r(|0) AS  r(|1)


AS 

 



 



AD yg

AD  ys

Legend: E0 (solid lines) = before the technological change; From E0 to E1 (dash-dot lines) = after the technological change without General Equilibrium feedback (no increase in ps); E2 (bold lines) = after the technological change with General Equilibrium feedback (after increase in ps).
episode.
At the time of the technological change, workers, employed and unemployed, learn that their contemporaneous and future labor incomes will be modied. For some unemployed workers searching for a "routine" task, the unemployment duration can become innite (rms stop opening vacancies
on -type labor market segment). Workers then decide to start searching a manual job. But, at this
time, the intensity of the "computerization" of the production process is at its beginning. Thus, the increase in the demand, and thus in the relative price of the service is moderate. This implies that the creation of new jobs in the services is also moderate: a labor market with "reasonable" unemployment duration disappears, and workers move to a labor market where this unemployment duration is higher, but with the perspective of a decline. Hence, search frictions allow to account for transitional "technological unemployment", which is an unemployment "excess" generated by the instantaneous closure of opportunities in the labor market of routine jobs, replaced by lower
opportunities than the ones before the shock. Moreover, when -type unemployed workers decide
to move towards labor market of services, the stock of unemployment worker is transitionally beyond its long-run value. Hence, non-employment is larger than its "natural" rate even if workers have instantaneously a higher probability to be hired than in their previous unemployment spells. This last point underlines the importance to develop a dynamic model to account for a reallocation process.
Given that the computerization process takes time, and that the re-organization of production extends this transition, one can observe a decline in the employment rates of the unskilled workers, despite their occupational choices leading them to search on service markets where opportunities

25

are better and are improving.
Notice that these opportunities are "better" because previous jobs disappears (the opportunities attached to the labor market of the routine tasks). Hence, this additional "technological unemployment" can be resorbed only after a meeting, and this search process can take time.
These adjustment processes can be quantitatively large because non-employment adjusts to its longrun level with some persistence. The service labor market slowly absorbs the new arrivals from the labor market of the routine jobs. This search process is not the same across countries. In a exible
labor market, when -type workers have no opportunities in the routine labor market, they move
towards the service labor market: instantaneously, non-employment in the service labor market jumps, but the high job nding rate allows worker to rapidly nd a job. In contrast, in a rigid labor market, after the same type of reallocation, given the low job nding rate, persistence of the non-employment is large.

Why do labor market institutions matter? The labor market institutions can modify the
allocation and its dynamic through the wage setting rules: the bargaining process can be countryspecic, workers'outside options are also country-specic and nally, a minimum wage (MW) can be a substitute for this bargained wage for low-paid workers.
The basic eect of the heterogeneity in LMI among countries is the gap between US and European employment rate. In order to enlighten the dierences between countries, we present in Figure 11 the same set of graphs as Figure 10, except that the minimum wage is now binding in the service sector. These pictures shows that the presence of MW changes the elasticity of labor market adjustments to TBTC. More importantly, the rise in MW during the TBTC can cancel the positive eects of these new opportunities on labor demand in services, leading the red workers from routine jobs without any new opportunity.

Analytical analysis The impact of TBTC in Autor & Dorn (2013)'s model can be summarized
as
Mobility: FR = AM ps Demand: ps = M RS(Cg, Cs) Elasticities of substitutions of F (·) and C(·) depend on {, } and  respectively. This implies that
the impact of BTC depends only on these 3 parameters. There is no labor supply elasticity because the supply of skilled labor is xed in all markets. In our model, we keep the same equation for the
demand for good and service (ps = M RS(Cg , Cs)), whereas on the labor market, we have
Mobility: U (R(), LM I) = U (M , LM I)

showing that occupational choices are based on worker's evaluation of search returns in each market.
Tightness  are deduced from rms free entry condition: they post vacancies until their expected
returns are equal to their costs. This leads to

where Hirings:

R() = R(FR, LM I) R() = M (AM ps, LM I)

In a simplied model where the functions U (·) do not depend on labor market occupation, we then deduce from the "Mobility" and the "Hiring" conditions that the threshold  is such that:

R(FR, LM I) = M (AM ps, LM I)

26

Figure 11: TBTC in a model with labor market frictions and minimum wage

r() (1) routine tasks

s

WC

(2) manual tasks a WC

(3) abstract tasks WC

 

 

 

JC wr()

JC ws

JC wa

pg

(4) good market  s (5) occupational choice ps

(6) service market

AS

 r(|0)  r(|1)

 AS

 



AD yg

  


AD  ys

Legend: E0 (solid lines) = before the technological change; From E0 to E1 (dash-dot lines) = after the technological change without General Equilibrium feedback (no increase in ps); E2 (bold lines) = after the technological change with General Equilibrium feedback (after increase in ps); bold-dashed lines = rise in minimum wage

As in Autor & Dorn (2013), the impact of TBTC depends on {, } and , which determines the dynamics of {, FR, ps}. In a model with labor market frictions, the impact of the TBTC also
depends on
LM I = { r, h , , sc , M W, , w }
wr wNash wage rigidity
and thus on the market-specic elasticities i(·), i = R, M , through the wage setting rules and the
dynamics of each sector.12 Hence, asymmetries between labor market, in addition to productivity,
are necessary to nd a value for  that diers from the ones proposed by Autor & Dorn (2013). To illustrate an alternative solution, assume for simplicity that wages are wr() = ( + (1 - )r)yr and wm = ( + (1 - )r)psAs (wage bargaining à la Hall & Milgrom (2008) with an unemployment benet proportional to productivity). Second, assume that ps is constant but yr decreases at rate g (ie. yr(t + 1) = (1 - g)yr(t)). We deduce that the occupational choice ("Mobility" condition) is
given by:

yr

r

+

1

-

fr()(1 - (1 - g)(1 - s

r) - fr())

=

pAm

r

+

1

fm(1 - r) - (1 - s - fm)

The "capitalization eect" in the LHS, and absent in the RHS, implies that yr = Amps is not the equation that determines the threshold of ability, because M (·) = R(·). A simple way to interpret
12If the behaviors and the history of each market were the same, then M (·) = R(·). In this case, the solution for
 would be FR = AM ps, simply because the only source of heterogeneity lies in productivity.

27

the previous equation is to notice that it denes  as follows:
(, g) =  with 1(, g) > 0 and 2(, g) < 0
When g = 0, the solution is, as in Autor & Dorn (2013) (AD) model, ADyr = psAm, whereas when g > 0, we necessary have  > AD. The search and matching framework transforms employment
into an investment decision: time matters, and thus the capitalization of future prot ows. If prot ows are decreasing with time, the rm's incentive to open vacancies is reduced. This leads workers to quit earlier the routine labor market than in a frictionless market. This results appears even if wage is exible (Nash bargaining rule) and even if there are no revenues non-indexed on wages, like
social programs. The gap between  and AD depends on the LMI, ie. in this example on {r, , c}. The wage setting rule is also a crucial element of labor market adjustments (the shape of W C in
Figures 10 and 11). It allows to share the labor market adjustments between wage and employment,
as a labor supply curve. The elasticity of W C locus is thus central in the quantitative analysis. The
steeper this curve, the larger the adjustments though quantities. If quantities react rapidly, then unemployment duration is also highly elastic and the more persistent the dynamic adjustments.
Routine jobs.· The sluggishness of real wages (the weight of the "social" norms) imply
that the quantities must largely decline in the market of the routine jobs in response to these relative loss of competitiveness. This is not the case when bargaining does not include "social" norm, all the regulation being at the charge of the State via a minimum wage. In this last case, the employment decline in routine tasks is less important, a large part of the adjustment being absorbed by the wage. Routine jobs are maintained longer and their wages converge to the minimum wage: this generates a concentration of low-paid worker at the minimum wage level.
Manual jobs.· In the service sector, the absence of a MW allows labor market to start
with a higher employment rate for the manual tasks, but a wage moderation (the "social" norms) allows them to generate a higher employment growth in the service sector. With a Minimum wage, the growth of the service sector is ensured by the rise in the service price with a constant unit cost, the minimum wage. Even if a minimum wage is more rigid than a wage that accounts for "social norms", the employment growth is slower because the number of vacancies is smaller (level eect of the MW) and also because the number of worker that choose to move is smaller than in US or in Germany (lower nding rates).
6.3 Model predictions on inequalities
6.3.1 Static perspective : wage and income polarization
Job polarization induces shifts in labor demand and supply across tasks, which generates divergent wage dynamics in the pool of employed workers; wage and income inequalities are further aected by the prevailing labor market institutions. In the model, the patterns of inequality can be captured in two complementary ways. First, by simply looking at the relative growth of wages paid for dierent groups (tasks); second, exploiting the simple heterogeneous agent structure of the model to look at changes in earnings or income inequality through more standard indicators as the Gini index.
Figure 12 reports the impact of job polarization on wage dynamics across tasks. We compute the predicted increase in wage for each task group between the beginning and the end of the technological
28

transition13. Our model is able to capture the polarization of US wages found in Autor and Dorn (2013): wage growth is largest at the top and bottom of the wage than in the middle14.
The cases of France and Germany illustrate the impact of wage-setting rules on wage polarization, which suggests that wage polarization has no the same characterization in all countries. In Germany, the wage is set with respect to a sector-specic reference wage whose value is based on past wages (the social norm). For abstract workers whose labor demand is rising, the reference wage tends to dampen the rise in the wage as shown in Figure 12. In contrast, for routine workers whose labor demand is falling, the reference wage contributes to containing downward pressures on the wage: the wage declines for these occupations are lower than in the US. In France, by contrast, the growth of abstract workers' wages captures changes in labor demand (abstract workers benet from rise in productivity), while those of routine and manual workers stem from the increases in the real minimum wage. Figure 12 reports growth rates across task groups. In order to fully grasp the evolution of inequalities, one must take into account the evolution of the number of workers in each group. Next section lls this gap.
Figure 12: Wage polarization. Change in real wage by task in the US, France and Germany
US France

 log(w)

 log(w)

0.4 0.4

0.2 0.2

0 Manual RoutineAbstract Germany
0.4 0.2

0 Manual RoutineAbstract
In Autor and Dorn (2013): US real hourly wage goes up by 17% at the bottom of the skill distribution, respectively 11% and 25% in the middle and top of the skill distribution.

 log(w)

0 Manual RoutineAbstract
The model features a simple heterogeneous agent framework, including abstract workers, a continuum of routine workers and manual workers. In this section, we assess to which extent job polarization can capture changes in earnings inequality (as summarized by the Gini indicator) in this context. With shifts in labor demand and occupational choices, the mass of workers in each employment pool evolves over time. The Gini coecient then reects both the changing shares of workers in each group as well as the wage growth dierentials reported in Figure 12. Figure 13 displays Lorenz curves for each country at the beginning and the end of the technological transi-
13 In order to make the graph comparable to Autor and Dorn (2013), we take into account the general increase in total factor productivity that is common to all wages. This increase is computed on country-specic TFP using
14GDP, labor and capital data. In Autor and Dorn (2013) paper, US real hourly wage goes up by 17% at the bottom of the skill distribution (respectively 11% and 25% in the middle and top of the skill distribution. Source : US Census data, 1980-2005)The model over-estimates the wage gain for abstract workers as their wage in the model responds to the rise in labor demand

29

tion15. At both points in time, we can compute a Gini coecient on wages and compare the model's
predictions to the data.

1 45° 1980
0.8 2008
0.6

Figure 13: Wage inequalities
US France 1 45° 1992
0.8 2008
0.6

Share of wages

Share of wages

0.4 0.4

0.2 0.2

0 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
Share of workers

0 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
Share of workers

Share of wages

1 45° 1992
0.8 2008
0.6
0.4
0.2

Germany

Gini 0.38 0.36
0.34
0.32 0.3
0.28

US Model US Data France Model France Data Germany Model Germany Data

0 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1

0.26 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010

Share of workers

Wage inequality along the transition path. Lorenz curves at the beginning and the end of the technological transition for each country. Evolution of

Gini coecients. Source: Gini coecients (US: Heathcote, Perri, Violante, 2010; Germany: Fuchs-Schündeln, Krueger and Sommer, 2010; France

: Atkinson, Glaude, Olier and Piketty, 1997)

The model is consistent with the increase in wage inequality found in US data until the early 1990s (see fourth panel). After the early 1990s, wage inequality continues to rise in the US data, an upward trend which could be matched in the model considering another wave of technological change. The model also predicts a stable Gini along the transition in Germany, which matches the ndings on German wages. The data suggest a rebound in wage inequality in 2003, which could be related to mini-jobs, which we do not have in the model. Finally, the model slightly under-predicts the level of the French Gini coecient. France is characterized in the model by an increase in Gini along the transition path, which echoes the hump-shape found in the French data in the early 1990s.
Dierences in the existing wage-setting mechanisms account for the divergent evolutions of inequalities in France and Germany. In Germany, as shown in Figure 12, the reference wage limits the increase in abstract wages and the fall in routine wages, which tends to narrow the range of wages in the economy. In France, even if the increasing real minimum wage dampens the inequalities with respect to the middle of the distribution, the larger wage inequalities than in Germany come from the larger increase of the high wages.

6.3.2 Dynamic perspective: taking into account future job opportunities
Looking at the evolution of inequality over time, in the US, it reects the decline in the generosity of income support when non-employed. This is also the case in Germany (after 1995) which now displays a steady rise in current income inequalities. In France, on the other hand, the shape of
15 Curves are actually piece-wise linear because of the limited heterogeneity in the model.

30

the Gini evolution remains the same. As can be seen from the shifts of the Lorenz curves, workers in middling positions tend to lose during the transition process: they leave routine jobs, their wage increase less than in other segments of the labor market (Figure 6) while abstract workers keep gaining from the technological change. This change in employment opportunities dominates the rising generosity of the minimum wage as well as income when non-employed through assistance programs and rising unemployment benets. In a nutshell, in France, the generous assistance programs and unemployment benets do not succeed in dampening the rise in inequalities driven by the wage growth at the top of the skill distribution (as shown in Figure 6). Nevertheless, France is the country where the poorest worker is less poor than in another country: this could be a foundation of this income distribution. Its cost is that the number of non-employed workers is larger than in the other countries.

The previous Gini captures inequalities in current income (static perspective). As such, it provides a picture of dispersion of instantaneous income. However, we argue that inequalities in future employment opportunities shall also be taken into account when assessing the impact of technological changes on inequalities (a dynamic perspective). In order to do so, we compute a measure of inequalities based on permanent income, which accounts for future employment opportunities
for each group of workers16. So, if there is no mobility from employment to employment (or to
an occupation to another) in the economy, this measure is the same as the inequality on current incomes, whereas if mobility is large, the current state does not provide any information about the income status tomorrow and thus all workers can incorporate in his current income the actualized value of these future incomes (a gain if the worker is at the bottom of the distribution, a loss if he is at the top). The results are reported in Figure 14 and 15.

Figure 14: Labor income inequality. Employed and non employed, static measure.
Gini: Wage 0.38

0.36

0.34

0.32  US wage
0.3
0.28

 France wage

 Germany wage

0.26 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010

Gini: Labor income 0.44
0.42
0.4
0.38
0.36  US current income 0.34  France current incoGmeermany current income 0.32
1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010
16We rely on value functions as they capture the discounted value of income given future employment opportunities
for each agent in the economy. We compute the monetary income ow that is equivalent to value functions.
31

Figure 15: Permanent income inequality.
0.46

0.44

0.42
0.4  US current income

0.38

0.36 0.34 0.32
0.3  US permanent income

 France current income  Germany current income
 France permaneGnetrimncaonmyepermanent income

1980 Dynamic19m85easure based on199v0 alue functions.19T95 his then includ2e00s0 future job opp2o00r5tunities. 2010
Since the aggregate employment rate increases in the US and in Germany after 1995, the chances to become employed rise. Then, the Gini curves on permanent income shifts downward with respect to its counterparts on current income. In France, labor mobility exists, leading the Gini curve on permanent incomes to shift downward with respect to its counterpart on current incomes. However, at the beginning of the technological transition, this shift is small (a gap of 0.01 between the Gini curves on permanent and current income) relative to what can be seen in the US and Germany (Gini gap of 0.02). This slight dierence in the French case suggests that France does not perform as well as Germany and the US in terms of improvement in employment opportunities. Interestingly, when considering permanent income France appears more unequal than the US. This is because the relatively weaker contribution of future employment opportunities outweighs the rising generosity of the minimum wage as well as of the income granted by existing assistance programs and unemployment
benets17.
7 Is Technological Change an opportunity or a risk? Counterfactual experiments in the US and in France
What would have been the employment growth without technological changes, or without the increase in labor supply of skilled workers ? Due to the complexity of the model and the general equilibrium eects it is hard to disentangle the respective role of TBTC, labor supply and LMI shifts. In order to understand the driving force behind movement in aggregate employment we perform a counterfactual analysis. We investigate two alternative scenarios. We wonder what the
17This result echoes ndings by Flinn (2002).
32

path of the economy would have been in absence of 1) the TBTC, 2) increase in labor supply of skilled workers.
7.1 US: Gains from polarization
In the US economy, on Figure 16, the benchmark case depicts job polarization: Routine employment falls while manual and abstract employment both increase. Our results are consistent with Autor & Dorn (2013)'s stress on TBTC as the leading force behind changes in employment shares across tasks. It results in a strong rise in aggregate employment rate of about 8 percentage points (from the beginning to the end of the transition, employment rate goes up from 0.72 to 0.80).
Figure 16: United states. Counterfactuals without TBTC or rise in labor supply of abstract workers.

Aggregate employment 0.81

Employment level: Astract 0.4

Employment level: Routine 0.35

0.8 0.35 0.3

0.79 0.3 0.25

0.78 0.25 0.2

0.77 0.2 1980 1990 2000 2010 1980 1990 2000 2010

0.76

Employment level: Manual

0.75 0.4

Bench

0.74

Bench 0.35

No TBTC

0.73

No TBTC No +Ls

0.3

No +Ls

0.72 0.25

0.71 1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

0.2 2010 1980 1990 2000 2010

"Bench" (solid line) = benchmark. "No TBTC" = counterfactual without TBTC. La rise and LMI change. "No "+Ls = counterfactual without rise in La bu TBTC and LMI change.
What would have happened in the absence of technological change? The employment level in the routine sector would have increased on impact due to the small decline in workers bargaining power which lowers negotiated wages and prompt employers to post more vacancies. But there is no reallocations. Employment in services declines slightly, meaning that the rise in aggregate employment is almost entirely governed by the labor supply shock of abstract job. It should be noted that TBTC amplies the rise in abstract jobs by raising the level of capital and therefore their productivity. Absent TBTC, employment growth would have been of 4 percentage points (from 0.72 to approximately 0.76) rather than the 8 percentage points in the benchmark economy. Without technological change, the rise in US employment would have been cut by half.
When we remove the increase in educational attainment, the transitional dynamic exhibits a weak increase in abstract employment. In turn, aggregate employment declines with respect to the benchmark scenario. The gap between the benchmark and the counterfactual amounts to 1.5 percentage
33

point, which suggests that, absent the rise in the supply of skilled labor, the US employment growth would have been 20% (1.5pp divided by 8pp) lower.
7.2 France: Pains from polarization
In France, the benchmark economy experiences a decline in employment by around 7 pp: on Figure 17, aggregate employment rate goes down from approximately 0.63 to 0.56. Despite the increase in employment in abstract jobs, the fall in low-skill employment (routine and service) explains the downward trend in aggregate employment. While the routine sector declines the service sector does not depict any clear increase. In other words, there is no reallocation from routine to service, workers remain unemployed. This is consistent with our analysis in section 6.2.2.
Figure 17: France. Counterfactuals without TBTC or rise in labor supply of abstract workers.

Aggregate employment 0.64
0.62
0.6

Employment level: Astract 0.24
0.22
0.2

Employment level: Routine 0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2

0.58
0.56
0.54 Bench No TBTC
0.52 No +Ls

0.18 1980 1990 2000 2010 1980 1990 2000 2010

Employment level: Manual 0.18
0.16

Bench No TBTC No +Ls

0.14

0.5 0.12 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 1980 1990 2000 2010

"Bench" (solid line)= benchmark. "No TBTC" = counterfactual without TBTC. La rise and LMI change. "No "+Ls = counterfactual without rise in La bu TBTC and LMI change.
Since TBTC generates employment fall, the counterfactual French economy without TBTC is better o than the benchmark scenario. Due to the increasing generosity of French LMI, aggregate employment rate still falls in the long run (by 2 pp, from 0.63 in the initial steady state to 0.61 approximately in the nal steady state). However, this falls is lower than the one observed in the benchmark scenario (7pp). We then conclude that, without technological change, the fall in French employment would have been cut by 70% (1-(2/7)).
The counterfactual economy without the rise in educational attainment displays a larger fall in aggregate employment (from 0.63 to 0.51) than the benchmark scenario (from 0.63 to 0.56). The model also predicts that, without the increase in skill labor, the fall in employment would have doubled. The improvement in educational attainment dampened the unfavorable consequences of technological change.

34

8 Conclusion
This paper develops a multi-sectorial search and matching model with endogenous occupational choice in a context of biased technological change. Our objective is to shed light on the way labor market institutions aect aggregate employment, job polarization and inequalities observed in the US and in European countries. We consider the cases of the US, France and Germany that are representative of alternative institutional settings, having the potential to induce divergent timepaths in the evolution of labor market outcomes during the process of technological transition. In the US, we nd employment gains from technological change and job polarization, whereas, in France, the technological change reduces aggregate employment in a context of job polarization. With counterfactuals experiments, we quantify the hypothetical change in aggregate employment without technological change or rise in the supply of skilled labor. In the US, without technological change (without the rise in skilled labor), employment growth would have been cut by half (by 20%). In France, the change in LMI, especially the rise in the minimum wage, aects new job opportunities in manual jobs: the reallocation of routine workers towards manual jobs is obstructed for want of job creations of manual services. Job polarization in France only mirrors the fall in aggregate employment. Hence, without technological change, the fall in French employment would have been cut by 70%. The model also predicts that, without the increase in skilled labor supply, the fall in French employment would have doubled. The improvement in educational attainment dampened the unfavorable consequences of technological change.
References
Acemoglu, D. (2001). Good jobs versus bad jobs. Journal of Labor Economics, (1), 121.
Alvarez, F. & Shimer, R. (2011). Search and Rest Unemployment. Econometrica, 79(1), 75122.
Angelopoulos, K., J. W. & Malley, J. (2015). Fiscal multipliers in a two-sector search and matching model. CESifo Working Paper 5197, CESifo.
Autor, D. H. & Dorn, D. (2013). The growth of low-skill service jobs and the polarization of the us
labor market. American Economic Review, 103(5), 15531597.
Barro, R. & Lee, J. (2013). A new data set of educational attainment in the world, 1950-2010.
Journal of Development Economics, 104, 184198.
Barron, J., Berger, M., & Black, D. (1997). Employer search, training, and vacancy duration.
Economic Inquiry, 35, 167192.
Barron, J. & Bishop, J. (1985). Extensive search, intensive search, and hiring costs: New evidence
on employer hiring activity. Economic Inquiry, 23(3), 363382.
Blanchard, O. & Wolfers, J. (1999). The Role of Shocks and Institutions in the Rise of European Unemployment: The Aggregate Evidence. NBER Working Papers 7282, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Inc.
Carrillo-Tudela, C. & Visschers, L. (2014). Unemployment and Endogenous Reallocation over the Business Cycle. IZA Discussion Papers 7124, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).
35

Cortes, M. (2015). Where have the middle-wage workers gone? a study of polarization using panel
data. Journal of Labor Economics. forthcoming.
Duernecker, G. (2014). Technology adoption, turbulence and the dynamics of unemployment. Journal of the European Economic Association, 12(3), 724  754.
Elsby, M., Hobijn, B., & Sahin, A. (2008). Unemployment Dynamics in the OECD. NBER Working
Paper 14617, NBER.
Flinn, C. J. (2002). Labour Market Structure and Inequality: A Comparison of Italy and the U.S.
Review of Economic Studies, 69(3), 61145.
Goos, M., M. A. & Salomons, A. (2009). Job polarization in europe. American Economic Review,
99(2), 5863.
Goos, M., M. A. & Salomons, A. (2014). Explaining job polarization: Routine-biased technological
change and oshoring. American Economic Review, 104(8), 25092526.
Hagedorn, M., Manovskii, I., & Stetsenko, S. (2014). Taxation and Unemployment in Models with Heterogeneous Workers. Mimeo.
Hall, R. E. (2005). Employment uctuations with equilibrium wage stickiness. American Economic Review, 95(1), 5065.
Hall, R. E. & Milgrom, P. R. (2008). The limited inuence of unemployment on the wage bargain.
American Economic Review, 98(4), 16531674.
Hornstein, A., Krusell, P., & Violante, G. (2007). Technology-policy interaction in frictional labour-
markets. Review of Economic Studies, 74(4), 10891124.
Kambourov, G. & Manovskii, I. (2009). Occupational specicity of human capital. International Economic Review.
Karabarbounis, L. & Neiman, B. (2014). The global decline of the labor share. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Krause, M. U. & Lubik, T. (2006). The cyclical upgrading of labor and on-the-job search. Labour Economics, (pp. 459477).
Ljungqvist, L. & Sargent, T. (2008). Two questions about european unemployment. Econometrica,
76(1).
Ljungqvist, L. & Sargent, T. J. (1998). The European Unemployment Dilemma. Journal of Political Economy, 106(3), 514550.
Mortensen, D. & Pissarides, C. (1994). Job creation and job destruction in the theory of unemploy-
ment. Review of Economic Studies, 61, 397415.
Mortensen, D. & Pissarides, C. (1998). Technological progress, job creation, and job destruction.
Review of Economic Dynamics, 1, 733753.
Petrongolo, B. & Pissarides, C. (2001). Looking into the black box : A survey of the matching
function. Journal of Economic Literature, 39, 390431.
36

Poletaev, M. & Robinson, C. (2008). Human capital specicity: Evidence from the dictionary of
occupational titles and displaced worker surveys, 1984-2000. Journal of Labor Economics, 26,
387420.

A Model

A.1 Good-producing rms

First, remark that this rm program can be solved in two steps, given the homogeneity of degree one of the production function and the exogenous process of the capital price. This property of the
rm program allow us to show that if the rm choose to re, it is optimal to re all of the -type
workers simultaneously. Indeed, we have:

Y z2 pz2 K = pk

Y z2

=

Y z2 K+
K


Y z2 Lr() Lr()

 pz2Y z2 - pkK

=

Y z2 pz2  Lr() Lr()

(26) (27) (28)

Given the production function (14), the equation (26) can be rewritten as follow:

pk

=

pz2µk-1

(1

-

µ

+

µk

)

1 

-1

=

pz2µk-1g(k)

where k 

K  r()

is

determined

by

this

equation

at

each

period

time,

given

{pk, pz2}.

production function leads also to

Y z2 = (1 - µ)g(k)  Lr ( )

The

Thus, we deduce that the equation (28) becomes

pz2Y z2 - pkK = pz2(1 - µ)g(k) Lr()


showing that the marginal productivity of one -type job does not change with the level of Lr(). Thus if at one period of the time, it is optimal to re one -type worker, it is optimal to re all of
them.
The FOC of this problem are w.r.t. {Vr(), l+1(), Lr()} are

0 = -c + µ() + +z12qr()

0 = -+z12 - F - +1()

0

=

pz2

Y z2  Lr ( )

-

wr ( )

+

+z12(1

-

s)

+

+1()(1

-

s)

-



z2

For the declining rms, we have µ()  0, with Vr() = 0. In this regime with "no-hiring", there
are two cases: the rm hoards its workforce, or the rm will re the workforce that correspond to

37

the type . In this case, we have l() < (1 - s)Lr() implying () = 0 and l+1() = (1 - s)Lr,+1() and thus ()  0. Using +z12 + +1() = -F , we obtain



z2

=

Y z2 pz2 Lr()

-

wr ( )

-

(1

-

s)F

and, given that () = 0, leading to  z2 = -F , we deduce

Y z2 0 = pz2 Lr() - wr() + F - (1 - s)F

When this condition holds, this determines the period at which the rm res the -type workers.

If

we

denote

Ja

=

pz1

Y z1 La

and

Jr ( )

=

pz2

Y Lr

z2
()

,

the

associated

Bellman

equations

of

a

lled

job

writes, when Va > 0 and Vr() > 0:

Ja = ya - wa + (1 - sa)Ja,+1 Jr() = yr() - wr() + (1 - s)Jr,+1()

(29) (30)

where ya = pz1 and yr() = pz2(1 - µ)g(k). The FOC equations for vacant jobs write:

0 = -ca + qaJa,+1 0 = -c + qr()Jr,+1()

A.2 Service-producing rms

The associated Bellman equations of a lled job writes:
Jmn () = psAs - wmn () + (1 - s) (1 - )Jmn ,+1() + Jm,+1 Jmo = psAs - wmo + (1 - s) (1 - )Jmo ,+1 + Jm,+1 Jm = psAs - wm + (1 - s)Jm,+1
The FOC for a vacant job write:
0 = -c + qmn ()Jmn +1() 0 = -c + qmo Jmo ,+1 0 = -c + qmJm,+1

(31) (32) (33)

B Model calibration
Figures 18 and 19 provide empirical supports for our calibration of pK and LMI (replacement ratios
and workers' bargaining power), respectively.

C Numerical method used to solve the model

Several elements account for the diculties we face is solving the model

38

Figure 18: Investment Price (relative to consumption price)

1.05 1
0.95

US Franc e Germany

0.9

0.85

0.8

0.75

0.7
Source: World Develo1pm98en0t Indicators. T1h9e8r5elative price is1n9o9rm0alized to one1in9919580. Data from20K0ar0abarbounis an2d0N0e5iman (QJE 2014).

Figure 19: Replacement rate and bargaining power in the data.

OECD data on UB replacement rate. The bargaining power is the average the union density and the union coverage from the Database on Institutional Characteristics of Trade Unions, Wage Settings, State Intervention and Social Pact (ICTWSS).
39

· The solving of the model involves dealing with a non-stationary environment in order to
capture structural changes in the economy. As a result, standard solution methods involving approximation of the dynamics around a unique steady state are not implementable.
· We have heterogeneous agents at the bottom of the wage distribution. The problem is currently solved with 27 ability levels   U (, ) , which makes the computation burdensome.
· In addition, along the transition path, we face a highly non-linear environment. The reasons
behind the non-linearity is 2-fold : i) the minimum wage can bind or not in some segments of
the labor market. This introduces several regimes in the economy depending on whether the
minimum wage binds or not. ii) Occupational choices involves also discontinuities as workers
of dierent abilities leave the routine labor market. We then have to deal with occasionally
binding constraints. The exact time of occupation switching for each ability level  along the
transition path and the exact jobs and periods with binding minimum wage are endogenously determined.
· Finally, this is a general equilibrium problem: the relative price of service is such that good
and service markets clear. This relative price also aects relative productivity levels across sectors, which feeds back on occupational choices, therefore employment levels in each sector and relative supply in the good and service markets, hence the relative price of service. This adds a search for a xed point at the general equilibrium, for each period along the transition path.

Standard procedures can no longer be used here because of the huge number of discontinuities. This leads us to propose an original algorithm for the numerical solution of the model. The algorithm must nd a xed point for a trajectory between an initial steady state and a new steady state, given that, during this adjustment process, exogenous variables, such as the policy tools, can change.
The numerical method is presented in the case of perfect forecast for the policy instruments {xt}tT=0.
We use the block-recursive aspect of the Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides model. With a blockrecursive system, it is possible to solve the paths of forward variables independently from the block
that governs the dynamics of backward variables. Let us denote  the vector of labor market tightness and N the vector of employment stocks, the whole system can be written in a block-
recursive way:

t = F(t+1, pst+1, xt+1) Nt+1 = FN (Nt, t)

(34) (35)

Using the block-recursive system, one can solve this problem as follows:
1. conditional on a guess on the equilibrium price {pst (0)}tT=1 and a sequence of exogenous variables {xt}tT=1.
2. For a terminal condition T , and vectors {pst , xt}tT=0, we obtain by backward iterations the values for T -1,T -2,...,0 using equation (34).
3. With this vector {t}Tt=0, we deduce, using FN in equation (35), the vector {Nt}Tt=0, given an initial condition N0.
4. We then use the general equilibrium condition on good and service markets (see section 4.8.1).
This determines a new relative price of service pst (1) = G(Nt(0), t(0)), t, we deduce a new sequence for {pst (1)}Tt=1.

40

5. We repeat steps 1-4 with an updated guess {pst (1)}tT=1, until convergence from one iteration z to the next z + 1: {pst (z)}Tt=1  {pst (z + 1)}Tt=1.
41

SFB 649 Discussion Paper Series 2016
For a complete list of Discussion Papers published by the SFB 649, please visit http://sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de.
001 "Downside risk and stock returns: An empirical analysis of the long-run and short-run dynamics from the G-7 Countries" by Cathy Yi-Hsuan Chen, Thomas C. Chiang and Wolfgang Karl Härdle, January 2016.
002 "Uncertainty and Employment Dynamics in the Euro Area and the US" by Aleksei Netsunajev and Katharina Glass, January 2016.
003 "College Admissions with Entrance Exams: Centralized versus Decentralized" by Isa E. Hafalir, Rustamdjan Hakimov, Dorothea Kübler and Morimitsu Kurino, January 2016.
004 "Leveraged ETF options implied volatility paradox: a statistical study" by Wolfgang Karl Härdle, Sergey Nasekin and Zhiwu Hong, February 2016.
005 "The German Labor Market Miracle, 2003 -2015: An Assessment" by Michael C. Burda, February 2016.
006 "What Derives the Bond Portfolio Value-at-Risk: Information Roles of Macroeconomic and Financial Stress Factors" by Anthony H. Tu and Cathy Yi-Hsuan Chen, February 2016.
007 "Budget-neutral fiscal rules targeting inflation differentials" by Maren Brede, February 2016.
008 "Measuring the benefit from reducing income inequality in terms of GDP" by Simon Voigts, February 2016.
009 "Solving DSGE Portfolio Choice Models with Asymmetric Countries" by Grzegorz R. Dlugoszek, February 2016.
010 "No Role for the Hartz Reforms? Demand and Supply Factors in the German Labor Market, 1993-2014" by Michael C. Burda and Stefanie Seele, February 2016.
011 "Cognitive Load Increases Risk Aversion" by Holger Gerhardt, Guido P. Biele, Hauke R. Heekeren, and Harald Uhlig, March 2016.
012 "Neighborhood Effects in Wind Farm Performance: An Econometric Approach" by Matthias Ritter, Simone Pieralli and Martin Odening, March 2016.
013 "The importance of time-varying parameters in new Keynesian models with zero lower bound" by Julien Albertini and Hong Lan, March 2016.
014 "Aggregate Employment, Job Polarization and Inequalities: A Transatlantic Perspective" by Julien Albertini, Francois Langot, Thepthida Sopraseuth and Jean Olivier Hairault, March 2016.
SFSBF6B4694, 9S,pSapnadnaduaeureSrtrSatßraeß1e, 1D,-D10-1107187B8eBrleinrlin htthpt:t/p/:/s/fbs6fb4694.w9.iwwiiw.hiu.h-bue-brleinrl.idne.de
ThTishrisesreasercahrcwhawsassupsuppoprtoerdtebdybtyhethDeeDuetsucthseche ForFsocrhsuchnugnsgesgmeeminesicnhsachftatfht rtohuroguhgthhethSeFSBF6B4694"9Ec"oEnconmoimc RicisRki"s.k".

